<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Manhood of Humanity.</title>
      <author><name reg="Korzybski, Alfred">Alfred Korzybski</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>May 13, 2008</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">25457</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-05-13">May 13, 2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Greg Weeks, La Monte H.P. Yarrol, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            Page-images available at
            &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID44bc319688a10/&gt;
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .sc              { font-variant: small-caps }
    .figure          { text-align: center; page-float: 'htb' }
    .center          { text-align: center }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center; bold">Manhood Of Humanity</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Science and Art of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Human Engineering</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Alfred Korzybski</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">E. P. Dutton &amp; Company</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">681 Fifth Avenue</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1921</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>
  </front>
<body>

<pb n="vii"/><anchor id="Pgvii"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Acknowledgement</head>

<p>
The author and the publishers acknowledge with gratitude
the following permissions to make use of copyright
material in this work:
</p>

<p>
Messrs. D. C. Heath &amp; Company, for permission to quote
from <q>Unified Mathematics,</q> by Louis C. Karpinski, Harry
Y. Benedict and John W. Calhoun.
</p>

<p>
Messrs. G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York and London, for
permission to quote from <q>Organism as a Whole</q> and <q>Physiology
of the Brain,</q> by Jacques Loeb.
</p>

<p>
Messrs. Harper &amp; Brothers, for permission to quote from
<q>From the Life, Imaginary Portraits of Some Distinguished
Americans,</q> by Harvey O'Higgins.
</p>

<p>
Messrs. D. Appleton &amp; Company, for permission to quote
from <q>Corporation Finance,</q> by E. S. Mead.
</p>

<p>
Messrs. J. B. Lippincott Company, for permission to
quote from <q>Forced Movements,</q> by Jacques Loeb.
</p>

<p>
Princeton University Press, for permission to quote from
<q>Heredity and Environment,</q> by Edwin Grant Conklin.
</p>

<p>
Columbia University Press, for permission to quote from
<q>The Human Worth of Rigorous Thinking,</q> by C. J.
Keyser.
</p>

<p>
The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, for permission
to quote from <hi rend='italic'>The Journal of Experimental Medicine</hi>,
Vol. 27.
</p>

<p>
The New School for Social Research, for permission to
quote from <q>An Outline of the History of the Western
European Mind,</q> by James Harvey Robinson.
</p>

<p>
The Engineering Magazine Company, for permission to
quote from <q>Mastering Power Production,</q> by Walter N.
Polakov.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="ix"/><anchor id="Pgix"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
This book is primarily a study of Man and ultimately
embraces all the great qualities and problems
of Man. As a study of Man it takes into consideration
<emph>all</emph> the characteristics which make Man what he
is. If some readers do note the absence of certain
expressions familiar to them, it does not mean that
the author does not feel or think as many other people&mdash;he
does&mdash;and very much so; but in this book
an effort has been made to approach the problem of
Man from a scientific-mathematical point of view,
and therefore great pains have been taken <emph>not</emph> to
use words insufficiently defined, or words with many
meanings. The author has done his utmost to use
such words as convey only the meaning intended,
and in the case of some words, such as <q>spiritual,</q>
there has been superadded the word <q>so-called,</q> not
because the author has any belief or disbelief in such
phenomena; there is no need for <emph>beliefs</emph> because some
such phenomena exist, no matter what we may think
of them or by what name we call them; but because
the word <q>spiritual</q> is not scientifically defined, and
every individual understands and uses this word in
a <emph>personal</emph> and private way. To be <hi rend='italic'>im</hi>personal the
<pb n="x"/><anchor id="Pgx"/>
author has had to indicate this element by adding
<q>so-called.</q> I repeat once again that this book is
not a <q>materialistic</q> or a <q>spiritualistic</q> book&mdash;it is
a study of <q>Man</q> and therefore does and <emph>should</emph>
include materialistic as well as spiritual phenomena
because only the complex of these phenomena constitutes
the complex of Man.
</p>

<p>
The problem has not been approached from the
point of view of any private doctrine or creed, but
from a mathematical, an engineering, point of view,
which is impersonal and passionless. It is obvious
that to be able to speak about the great affairs of
Man, his spiritual, moral, physical, economic, social
or political status, it must first be ascertained what
Man is&mdash;what is his real nature and what are the
basic laws of his nature. If we succeed in finding
the laws of human nature, all the rest will be a comparatively
easy task&mdash;the ethical, social, economic
and political status of Man should be in accord with
the laws of his nature; then civilization will be a
human civilization&mdash;a permanent and peaceful one&mdash;not
before.
</p>

<p>
It is useless to argue if electricity be <q>natural</q> or
<q><emph>super</emph>natural,</q> of <q>material</q> or of <q>spiritual</q>
origin. As a matter of fact we do not ask these
questions in studying electricity; we endeavor to find
out the natural laws governing it and in handling
live wires we do not argue or speculate about them&mdash;we
<pb n="xi"/><anchor id="Pgxi"/>
use rubber gloves, etc. It will be the same with
Man and the great affairs of Man&mdash;we have, first
of all, to know what Man is.
</p>

<p>
Though this book has been written with scrupulous
care to avoid words or terms of vague meaning&mdash;and
though it often may seem coldly critical
of things metaphysical, it has not been written
with indifference to that great, perhaps the greatest,
urge of the human heart&mdash;the craving for spiritual
truth&mdash;our yearning for the higher potentialities of
that which we call <q>mind,</q> <q>soul</q> and <q>spirit</q>&mdash;but
it has been written with the deep desire to find the
source of these qualities, their scientific significance
and a scientific proof of them, so that they may be
approached and studied by the best minds of the
world without the digressions, and misinterpretations
that are caused by the color and the confusion
of personal emotions; and if the book be read with
care, it will be seen that, though the clarifying definition
of the classes of life has been chiefly used in
the book for its great carrying power in the <emph>practical</emph>
world, its greatest help will ultimately be in guiding
the investigation, the right valuation and especially
the control and use of the higher human powers.
</p>

<p>
In writing this book I have been not only introducing
new ideas and new methods of analysis, but
I have been using a tongue new to me. The original
manuscript was very crude and foreign in form, and
<pb n="xii"/><anchor id="Pgxii"/>
I am greatly indebted to various friends for their
patient kindness in correcting the many errors of my
poor English.
</p>

<p>
I am also under great obligations to Walter
Polakov, Doctor of Engineering, for his exceedingly
helpful suggestions, not only in giving me a thorough
criticism from the point of view of the Engineer, but
also in devoting his energies to organizing the first
<q>Time-binding Club</q> where these problems have
been discussed and criticized, with great practical
results.
</p>

<p>
To all those who have read and criticized the
manuscript or helped otherwise&mdash;Professors E. H.
Moore, C. J. Keyser, J. H. Robinson, Burges Johnson,
E. A. Ross, A. Petrunkevitch; and Doctors J.
Grove-Korski, Charles P. Steinmetz, J. P. Warbasse;
Robert B. Wolf, Vice-President of the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers; Champlain L.
Riley, Vice-President of the American Society of
Heating and Ventilating Engineers; Miss Josephine
Osborn; to the authors, L. Brandeis, E. G. Conklin,
C. J. Keyser, J. Loeb, E. S. Mead, H. O'Higgins,
W. Polakov, J. H. Robinson, R. B. Wolf, for their
kind permission to quote them, I wish to express my
sincere appreciation.
</p>

<p>
I wish also to acknowledge the deepest gratitude
to my wife, formerly Mira Edgerly, who has found
in this discovery of the natural law for the human
<pb n="xiii"/><anchor id="Pgxiii"/>
class of life, the solution of her life long search, and
who, because of her interest in my work, has given
me incomparably inspiring help and valuable criticism.
It is not an exaggeration to state that except
for her steady and relentless work and <emph>her time,
which saved my time</emph>, this book could not have been
produced in such a comparatively short time.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Walter Polakov of New York City, Industrial
Counsellor and Industrial Engineer in New
York City, has kindly consented at my request to act,
with my authority, as my representative to whom
any further queries should be addressed in my absence
from America.
</p>

<p>
To all other friends who have helped in many personal
ways I express thankfulness, as I wish also to
thank John Macrae, Esq., the Vice-President of E.
P. Dutton &amp; Co., for his unusual attitude toward
publishing the book.
</p>

<ab>
A. K.<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>January 17, 1921</hi><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>New York City.</hi>
</ab>

<pb n="001"/><anchor id="Pg001"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter I. Introduction"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter I. Introduction"/>
<head>Chapter I. Introduction.
Method and Processes of Approach to a New Concept of Life</head>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q rend="pre">For a while he trampled with impunity on laws
human and divine but, as he was obsessed with the
delusion that two and two makes five, he fell, at last
a victim to the relentless rules of humble Arithmetic.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Remember, O stranger, Arithmetic is the first of
the sciences and the mother of safety.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Brandeis.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
It is the aim of this little book to point the way
to a new science and art&mdash;the science and art of
Human Engineering. By Human Engineering I
mean the science and art of directing the energies
and capacities of human beings to the advancement
of human weal. It need not be argued in these times
that the establishment of such a science&mdash;the science
of human welfare&mdash;is an undertaking of immeasurable
importance. No one can fail to see that its
importance is supreme.
</p>

<p>
It is evident that, if such a science is to be established
it must be founded on ascertained facts&mdash;it
must accord with what is <emph>characteristic</emph> of Man&mdash;it
must be based upon a just conception of what Man
<pb n="002"/><anchor id="Pg002"/>
is&mdash;upon a right understanding of Man's place in
the scheme of Nature.
</p>

<p>
No one need be told how indispensable it is to
have true ideas&mdash;just concepts&mdash;correct notions&mdash;of
the things with which we humans have to deal;
everyone knows for example, that to mistake solids
for surfaces or lines would wreck the science and
art of geometry; anyone knows that to confuse fractions
with whole numbers would wreck the science
and art of arithmetic; everyone knows that to mistake
vice for virtue would destroy the foundation of
ethics; everyone knows that to mistake a desert
mirage for a lake of fresh water does but lure the
fainting traveler to dire disappointment or death.
Now, it is perfectly clear that of all the things with
which human beings have to deal, the most important
by far is Man himself&mdash;humankind&mdash;men, women
and children. It follows that for us human beings
nothing else can be quite so important as a clear, true,
just, scientific concept of Man&mdash;a right understanding
of what we as human beings really are. For it
requires no great wisdom, it needs only a little reflection,
to see that, if we humans radically misconceive
the nature of man&mdash;if we regard man as being
something which he is not, whether it be something
higher than man or lower&mdash;we thereby commit an
error so fundamental and far reaching as to produce
<pb n="003"/><anchor id="Pg003"/>
every manner of confusion and disaster in individual
life, in community life and in the life of the race.
</p>

<p>
The question we have, therefore, to consider first
of all is fundamentally: What is Man? What is a
man? What is a human being? What is the defining
or characteristic mark of humanity? To this
question two answers and only two have been given
in the course of the ages, and they are both of them
current to-day. One of the answers is biological&mdash;man
is an animal, a certain kind of animal; the other
answer is a mixture partly biological and partly
mythological or partly biological and partly philosophical&mdash;man
is a combination or <emph>union</emph> of animal
with something supernatural. An important part of
my task will be to show that both of these answers
are radically wrong and that, beyond all things else,
they are primarily responsible for what is dismal in
the life and history of humankind. This done, the
question remains: What is Man? I hope to show
clearly and convincingly that the answer is to be found
in the patent fact that human beings possess in varying
degrees a certain natural faculty or power or capacity
which serves at once to give them their appropriate
dignity as human beings and to discriminate them,
not only from the minerals and the plants but also
from the world of animals, this peculiar or characteristic
human faculty or power or capacity I shall
<pb n="004"/><anchor id="Pg004"/>
call the <emph>time-binding</emph> faculty or <emph>time-binding</emph> power
or <emph>time-binding</emph> capacity. What I mean by time-binding
will be clearly and fully explained in the course of
the discussion, and when it has been made clear, the
question&mdash;What Is Man?&mdash;will be answered by saying
that man is a being naturally endowed with time-binding
capacity&mdash;that a human being is a time-binder&mdash;that
men, women and children constitute the
time-binding class of life.
</p>

<p>
There will then remain the great task of indicating
and in a measure sketching some of the important
ways in which the true conception of man as man
will transform our views of human society and the
world, affect our human conduct and give us a growing
body of scientific wisdom regarding the welfare
of mankind including all posterity.
</p>

<p>
The purpose of this introductory chapter is to
consider certain general matters of a preliminary
nature&mdash;to indicate the spirit of the undertaking&mdash;to
provide a short course of approach and preparation&mdash;to
clear the deck, so to speak, and make ready
for action.
</p>

<p>
There are two ways to slide easily through life:
Namely, to believe everything, or to doubt everything;
both ways save us from thinking. The majority
take the line of least resistance, preferring to
have their thinking done for them; they accept ready-made
individual, private doctrines as their own and
<pb n="005"/><anchor id="Pg005"/>
follow them more or less blindly. Every generation
looks upon its own creeds as true and permanent and
has a mingled smile of pity and contempt for the
prejudices of the past. For two hundred or more
generations of our historical past this attitude has
been repeated two hundred or more times, and unless
we are very careful our children will have the same
attitude toward us.
</p>

<p>
There can be no doubt that humanity belongs to
a class of life which to a large extent determines its
own destinies, establishes its own rules of education
and conduct, and thus influences every step we are
free to take within the structure of our social system.
But the power of human beings to determine their
own destinies is limited by natural law, Nature's law.
It is the counsel of wisdom to discover the laws of
nature, including the laws of human nature, and then
to live in accordance with them. The opposite is
folly.
</p>

<p>
A farmer must know the natural laws that govern
his wheat, or corn, or cow, as otherwise he will not
have satisfactory crops, or the quality and abundance
of milk he desires, whereas the knowledge of these
laws enables him to produce the most favorable conditions
for his plants and animals, and thereby to
gain the desired results.
</p>

<p>
Humanity must know the natural laws for humans,
otherwise humans will not create the conditions and
<pb n="006"/><anchor id="Pg006"/>
the customs that regulate human activities which will
make it possible for them to have the most favorable
circumstances for the fullest human development in
life; which means the release of the maximum natural-creative
energy and expression in mental, moral,
material and spiritual and all the other great fields
of human activities, resulting in happiness in life and
in work&mdash;collectively and individually&mdash;because the
conditions of the earning of a livelihood influence and
shape all our mental processes and activities, the
quality and the form of human inter-relationship.
</p>

<p>
Every human achievement, be it a scientific discovery,
a picture, a statue, a temple, a home or a
bridge, has to be conceived in the mind first&mdash;the
plan thought out&mdash;before it can be made a reality,
and when anything is to be attempted that involves
any number of individuals&mdash;methods of coordination
have to be considered&mdash;the methods which have
proven to be the best suited for such undertakings
are engineering methods&mdash;the engineering of <emph>an idea</emph>
toward a complete <emph>realization</emph>. Every engineer has
to know the materials with which he has to work
and the natural laws of these materials, as discovered
by observation and experiment and formulated by
mathematics and mechanics; else he can not calculate
the forces at his disposal; he can not compute the
resistance of his materials; he can not determine the
capacity and requirements of his power plant; in
<pb n="007"/><anchor id="Pg007"/>
short, he can not make the most profitable use of his
resources. Lately in all industries and particularly
during the late World War, which was itself a
gigantic industrial process, another factor manifested
itself and proved to be of the utmost importance:
namely, the human factor, which is not material but
is mental, moral, psychological. It has been found
that maximum production may be attained when and
only when the production is carried on in conformity
with certain psychological laws, roughly determined
by the analysis of human nature.
</p>

<p>
Except for productive human labor, our globe is
too small to support the human population now upon
it. Humanity must produce or perish.
</p>

<p>
Production is essentially a task for engineers; it
essentially depends upon the discovery and the application
of natural laws, including the laws of
human nature. It is, therefore, not a task for old
fashioned philosophical speculation nor for barren
metaphysical reasoning <hi rend='italic'>in vacuo</hi>; it is a scientific
task and involves the coordination and cooperation
of all the sciences. This is why it is an engineering
task.
</p>

<p>
For engineering, rightly understood, is the coordinated
sum-total of human knowledge gathered
through the ages, with mathematics as its chief instrument
and guide. Human Engineering will
embody the theory and practice&mdash;the science and
<pb n="008"/><anchor id="Pg008"/>
art&mdash;of all engineering branches united by a common
aim&mdash;the understanding and welfare of mankind.
</p>

<p>
Here I want to make it very clear that mathematics
is not what many people think it is; it is not
a system of mere formulas and theorems; but as
beautifully defined by Professor Cassius J. Keyser,
in his book <hi rend='italic'>The Human Worth of Rigorous Thinking</hi>
(Columbia University Press, 1916), mathematics
is the science of <q>Exact thought or rigorous
thinking,</q> and one of its distinctive characteristics
is <q>precision, sharpness, completeness of definitions.</q>
This quality alone is sufficient to explain why people
generally do not like mathematics and why even some
scientists bluntly refuse to have anything to do with
problems wherein mathematical reasoning is involved.
In the meantime, mathematical philosophy
has very little, if anything, to do with mere calculations
or with numbers as such or with formulas; it
is a philosophy wherein precise, sharp and rigorous
thinking is essential. Those who deliberately refuse
to think <q>rigorously</q>&mdash;that is mathematically&mdash;in
connections where such thinking is possible, commit
the sin of preferring the worse to the better; they
deliberately violate the supreme law of intellectual
rectitude.
</p>

<p>
Here I have to make it clear that for the purpose
of Human Engineering the old concepts of matter,
space and time are sufficient to start with; they are
<pb n="009"/><anchor id="Pg009"/>
sufficient in much the same way as they have been
sufficient in the old science of mechanics. Figuratively
speaking Human Engineering is a higher order
of bridge engineering&mdash;it aims at the spanning of a
gap in practical life as well as in knowledge. The
old meanings of matter, space and time were good
enough to prevent the collapse of a bridge; the same
understanding of space and time as used in this book
will protect society and humanity from periodical
collapses. The old mechanics lead directly to such
a knowledge of the intrinsic laws governing the universe
as to suggest the new mechanics. Human
Engineering will throw a new light on many old
conceptions and will help the study and understanding
of matter, space and time in their relative meanings,
and perhaps will ultimately lead to an understanding
of their absolute meanings.
</p>

<p>
Philosophy in its old form could exist only in the
absence of engineering, but with engineering in existence
and daily more active and far reaching, the old
verbalistic philosophy and metaphysics have lost their
reason to exist. They were no more able to understand
the <q>production</q> of the universe and life than
they are now able to understand or grapple with
<q>production</q> as a means to provide a happier existence
for humanity. They failed because their venerated
method of <q>speculation</q> can not <emph>produce</emph>, and
its place must be taken by mathematical thinking.
<pb n="010"/><anchor id="Pg010"/>
Mathematical reasoning is displacing metaphysical
reasoning. Engineering is driving verbalistic
philosophy out of existence and humanity gains
decidedly thereby. Only a few parasites and <q>speculators</q>
will mourn the disappearance of their old
companion <q>speculation.</q> The world of producers&mdash;the
predominating majority of human beings&mdash;will
welcome a philosophy of ordered thought and
production.
</p>

<p>
The scientists, all of them, have their duties no
doubt, but they do not fully use their education if
they do not try to broaden their sense of responsibility
toward all mankind instead of closing themselves
up in a narrow specialization where they find
their pleasure. Neither engineers nor other scientific
men have any right to prefer their own personal
peace to the happiness of mankind; their place and
their duty are in the front line of struggling humanity,
not in the unperturbed ranks of those who keep
themselves aloof from life. If they are indifferent,
or discouraged because they feel or think that they
know that the situation is hopeless, it may be proved
that undue pessimism is as dangerous a <q>religion</q>
as any other blind creed. Indeed there is very little
difference in kind between the medieval fanaticism
of the <q>holy inquisition,</q> and modern intolerance
toward new ideas. All kinds of intellect must get
together, for as long as we presuppose the situation
<pb n="011"/><anchor id="Pg011"/>
to be hopeless, the situation will indeed be hopeless.
The spirit of Human Engineering does not know the
word <q>hopeless;</q> for engineers know that wrong
methods are alone responsible for disastrous results,
and that every situation can be successfully handled
by the use of proper means. The task of engineering
science is not only to know but to know how. Most
of the scientists and engineers do not yet realize that
their united judgment would be invincible; no system
or class would care to disregard it. Their knowledge
is the very force which makes the life of humanity
pulsate. If the scientists and the engineers
have had no common base upon which to unite, a
common base must be provided. To-day the pressure
of life is such that we cannot go forward without
their coordinating guidance. But first there must
be the desire to act. One aim of this book is to furnish
the required stimulus by showing that Human
Engineering will rescue us from the tangle of private
opinions and enable us to deal with all the problems
of life and human society upon a scientific basis.
</p>

<p>
If those who know why and how neglect to act,
those who do not know will act, and the world will
continue to flounder. The whole history of mankind
and especially the present plight of the world show
only too sadly how dangerous and expensive it is to
have the world governed by those who do not know.
</p>

<p>
In paying the price of this war, we have been made
<pb n="012"/><anchor id="Pg012"/>
to realize that even the private individual can not
afford to live wrapped up in his own life and not
take his part in public affairs. He must acquire the
habit of taking his share of public responsibility.
This signifies that a very great deal of very simple
work, all pointing in the direction of a greater work,
must be done in the way of educating, not engineers
and scientific men only, but the general public to cooperate
in establishing the practice of Human Engineering
in all the affairs of human society and life.
</p>

<p>
In writing this book I have had to wrestle with
tremendous difficulties in expressing new thoughts
and in indicating new methods. The reader who
stops to criticize words or expressions because of
their more or less happy or unhappy use will miss
the whole point of the work. The reading of it
should be done with a view to seeing how much can
be found in it of what is new and good that may be
elaborated further, and put into better form. This
new enterprise is too difficult and too vast for the
unaided labor of one man&mdash;life is too short.
</p>

<p>
The method used in this book in analysing life
phenomena is essentially an engineering method, and
as physics and mechanics always suggest to mathematicians
new fields for analysis, it is not improbable
that Human Engineering will give mathematicians
new and interesting fields for research. The humblest
rôle of mathematicians in Human Engineering
<pb n="013"/><anchor id="Pg013"/>
may be likened to that of <q>Public accountants</q> who
put <emph>in order</emph> the affairs of business.
</p>

<p>
In relation to mathematics Bertrand Russell has
said: <q>Logic is the youth of mathematics, mathematics
is the manhood of logic.</q> This brilliant <hi rend='italic'>mot</hi>
of the eminent philosopher of mathematics is no
doubt just and is profoundly significant; the least it
can teach us is that it is useless to try to find a
dividing line between logic and mathematics, for no
such line exists; to seek for one serves merely to
betray one's ignorance of mathematical philosophy.
Elsewhere Mr. Russell says: <q>The hope of satisfaction
to our more human desires, the hope of demonstrating
that the world has this or that ethical characteristic,
is not one which, so far as I can see, philosophy
can do anything whatever to satisfy.</q> By
<q>philosophy</q> he means mathematical philosophy&mdash;a
philosophy that is rigorously scientific, not vaguely
speculative. I am entirely unable to agree with him
that such a philosophy can make no contribution to
ethics. On the contrary, I contend, and in this book
I hope to show, that by mathematical philosophy,
by rigorously scientific thinking, we can arrive at the
true conception of what a human being really is and
that in thus discovering the characteristic nature of
man we come to the secret and source of ethics. Ethics
as a science will investigate and explain the essential
nature of man and the obligations which the essential
<pb n="014"/><anchor id="Pg014"/>
nature of man imposes upon human beings. It will
be seen that to live righteously, to live ethically, is to
live in accordance with the laws of human nature;
and when it is clearly seen that man is a natural
being, a part of nature literally, then it will be seen
that the laws of human nature&mdash;the only possible
rules for ethical conduct&mdash;are no more <emph>super</emph>natural
and no more <emph>man</emph>-made than is the law of gravitation,
for example, or any other natural law.
</p>

<p>
It is no cause for wonder that mathematical thinking
should lead to such a result; for Man is a <emph>natural</emph>
being, man's mind is a <emph>natural agency</emph>, and the results
of rigorous thinking, far from being artificial fictions,
are natural facts&mdash;natural revelations of natural
law.
</p>

<p>
I hope I have not given the impression, by repeated
allusion to mathematical science, that this
book is to be in any technical sense a mathematical
treatise. I have merely wished to indicate that the
task is conceived and undertaken in the mathematical
spirit, which must be the guiding spirit of Human
Engineering; for no thought, if it be non-mathematical
in spirit, can be trusted, and, although mathematicians
sometimes make mistakes, the spirit of
mathematics is always right and always sound.
</p>

<p>
Whilst I do not intend to trouble the reader with
any highly technical mathematical arguments, there
are a few simple mathematical considerations which
<pb n="015"/><anchor id="Pg015"/>
anyone of fair education can understand, which are
of exceedingly great importance for our purpose,
and to which, therefore, I ask the reader's best attention.
One of the ideas is that of an <emph>arithmetical
progression</emph>; another one is that of a <emph>geometrical
progression</emph>. Neither of them involves anything
more difficult than the most ordinary arithmetic of
the secondary school or the counting house, but it
will be seen that they throw a flood of light upon
many of the most important human concerns.
</p>

<p>
Because we are human beings we are all of us
interested in what we call progress&mdash;progress in law,
in government, in jurisprudence, in ethics, in philosophy,
in the natural sciences, in economics, in the
fine arts, in the practical arts, in the production and
distribution of wealth, in all the affairs affecting the
welfare of mankind. It is a fact that all these great
matters are interdependent and interlocking; it is
therefore a fact of the utmost importance that progress
in each of the cardinal matters must keep abreast
of progress in the other cardinal matters in order to
keep a just equilibrium, a proper balance, and so to
maintain the integrity and continued prosperity of
the whole complex body of our social life; it is a
fact, a fact of observation, that in some of the great
matters progress proceeds in accordance with one
law and one rate of advancement and in others in
accordance with a very different law and rate; it is
<pb n="016"/><anchor id="Pg016"/>
a fact, a fact of observation and sad experience, a
fact attested by all history and made evident by reason,
that owing to the widely differing laws and rates
of progress in the great essential concerns of humanity,
the balance and equilibrium among the parts is
disturbed, the strain gradually increases until a violent
break ensues in the form of social conflicts,
insurrections, revolutions and war; it is a fact that
the readjustment that follows, as after an earthquake,
does indeed establish a kind of new equilibrium,
but it is an equilibrium born of violence, and
it is destined to be again disturbed periodically without
end, unless by some science and art of Human
Engineering progress in all the great matters essential
to human weal can be made to proceed in accordance
with one and the same law having its validity
in the nature of man.
</p>

<p>
Taken in combination, the facts just stated are so
extremely important that they deserve to be stated
with the utmost emphasis and clarity. To this end
I beg the reader to consider very carefully and side
by side the two following series of numbers. The
first one is a simple geometrical progression&mdash;denoted
by (<hi rend='italic'>GP</hi>); the second one is a simple arithmetical
progression&mdash;denoted by (<hi rend='italic'>AP</hi>):
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>GP</hi>: 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, etc.;<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>AP</hi>: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, etc.
</p>

<pb n="017"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>

<p>
For convenience of comparison I let them begin
with the same number and for simplicity I have
taken 2 for this initial term; observe that in the
(<hi rend='italic'>GP</hi>) each term is got from the preceding term by
<hi rend='italic'>multiplying</hi> by 2 and that
in the (<hi rend='italic'>AP</hi>) each term
is got from its predecessor by adding 2; in the first
series the multiplier 2 is called the common <hi rend='italic'>ratio</hi> and
in the second series the repeatedly added 2 is called
the common <hi rend='italic'>difference</hi>; it is again for the convenience
of comparison that I have chosen the same number
for both common ratio and common difference and
for the sake of simplicity that I have taken for this
number the easy number 2. Other choices would
be logically just as good.
</p>

<p>
Why have I introduced these two series? Because
they serve to illustrate perfectly two widely different
<emph>laws of progress</emph>&mdash;two laws representing vastly different
<emph>rates</emph> of growth, increase, or <emph>advancement</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Do not fail to observe in this connection the following
two facts. One of them is that the magnitude
of the terms of any geometric progression whose
ratio (no matter how small) is 2 or more will overtake
and surpass the magnitude of the corresponding
terms of any arithmetical progression, no matter
how large the common difference of the latter may
be. The other fact to be noted is that the greater
the ratio of a geometric progression, the more
rapidly do its successive terms increase; so that the
<pb n="018"/><anchor id="Pg018"/>
terms of one geometric progression may increase a
thousand or a million or a billion times faster than
the corresponding terms of another geometric progression.
As any geometric progression (of ratio
equal to 2 or more), no matter how slow, outruns
every arithmetic progression, no matter how fast,
so one geometric progression may be far swifter
than another one of the same type.
</p>

<p>
To every one it will be obvious that the two progressions
differ in pace; and that the difference between
their corresponding terms becomes increasingly
larger and larger the farther we go; for instance,
the sum of the first six terms of the geometrical
progression is 126, whereas the sum of the first
six terms of the arithmetical progression is only 42,
the difference between the two sums being 84; the
sum of 8 terms is 510 for the (<hi rend='italic'>GP</hi>) and 72 for
the (<hi rend='italic'>AP</hi>), the difference between these sums (of only
8 terms each) being 438, already much larger than
before; if now we take the sums of the first 10 terms,
they will be 2046 and 110 having a difference of
1936; etc., etc.
</p>

<p>
Consider now any two matters of great importance
for human weal&mdash;jurisprudence for example,
and natural science&mdash;or any other two major concerns
of humanity. It is as plain as the noon-day
sun that, if progress in one of the matters advances
according to the law of a geometric progression and
<pb n="019"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
the other in accordance with a law of an arithmetical
progression, progress in the former matter will very
quickly and ever more and more rapidly outstrip
progress in the latter, so that, if the two interests
involved be interdependent (as they always are), a
strain is gradually produced in human affairs, social
equilibrium is at length destroyed; there follows a
period of readjustment by means of violence and
force. It must not be fancied that the case supposed
is merely hypothetical. The whole history of mankind
and especially the present condition of the world
unite in showing that far from being merely hypothetical,
the case supposed has always been actual and is
actual to-day on a vaster scale than ever before. My
contention is that while progress in some of the great
matters of human concern has been long proceeding
in accordance with the law of a rapidly increasing
geometric progression, progress in the other matters
of no less importance has advanced only at the rate
of an arithmetical progression or at best at the rate
of some geometric progression of relatively slow
growth. To see it and to understand it we have to
pay the small price of a little observation and a little
meditation.
</p>

<p>
Some technological invention is made, like that of
a steam engine or a printing press, for example; or
some discovery of scientific method, like that of
analytical geometry or the infinitesimal calculus; or
<pb n="020"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>
some discovery of natural law, like that of falling
bodies or the Newtonian law of gravitation. What
happens? What is the effect upon the progress of
knowledge and invention? The effect is stimulation.
Each invention leads to new inventions and each discovery
to new discoveries; invention breeds invention,
science begets science, the children of knowledge
produce their kind in larger and larger families; the
process goes on from decade to decade, from generation
to generation, and the spectacle we behold is that
of advancement in scientific knowledge and technological
power according to the law and rate of a
rapidly increasing geometric progression or logarithmic
function.
</p>

<p>
And now what must we say of the so-called sciences&mdash;the
pseudo sciences&mdash;of ethics and jurisprudence
and economics and politics and government?
For the answer we have only to open our eyes and
behold the world. By virtue of the advancement
that has long been going on with ever accelerated
logarithmic rapidity in invention, in mathematics, in
physics, in chemistry, in biology, in astronomy and
in applications of them, time and space and matter
have been already conquered to such an extent that
our globe, once so seemingly vast, has virtually
shrunken to the dimensions of an ancient province;
and manifold peoples of divers tongues and traditions
and customs and institutions are now constrained
<pb n="021"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>
to live together as in a single community.
There is thus demanded a new ethical wisdom, a
new legal wisdom, a new economical wisdom, a new
political wisdom, a new wisdom in the affairs of government.
For the new visions our anguished times
cry aloud but the only answers are reverberated
echoes of the wailing cry mingled with the chattering
voices of excited public men who know not what to
do. Why? What is the explanation? The question
is double: Why the disease? And why no remedy
at hand? The answer is the same for both. And
the answer is that the so-called sciences of ethics and
jurisprudence and economics and politics and government
have not kept pace with the rapid progress
made in the other great affairs of man; they have
lagged behind; it is because of their lagging that the
world has come to be in so great distress; and it is
because of their lagging that they have not now
the needed wisdom to effect a cure.
</p>

<p>
Do you ask why it is that the <q>social</q> sciences&mdash;the
so-called sciences of ethics, etc.&mdash;have lagged
behind? The answer is not far to seek nor difficult
to understand. They have lagged behind, partly
because they have been hampered by the traditions
and the habits of a bygone world&mdash;they have looked
backward instead of forward; they have lagged behind,
partly because they have depended upon the
barren methods of verbalistic philosophy&mdash;they
<pb n="022"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>
have been metaphysical instead of scientific; they
have lagged behind, partly because they have been
often dominated by the lusts of cunning <q>politicians</q>
instead of being led by the wisdom of enlightened
statesmen; they have lagged behind, partly because
they have been predominantly concerned to protect
<q>vested interests,</q> upon which they have in the main
depended for support; the <emph>fundamental</emph> cause, however,
of their lagging behind is found in the astonishing
fact that, despite their being by their very
nature most <emph>immediately</emph> concerned with the affairs
of mankind, they have not discovered what Man
really is but have from time immemorial falsely regarded
human beings either as animals or else as
combinations of animals and something supernatural.
With these two monstrous conceptions of the essential
nature of man I shall deal at a later stage of this
writing.
</p>

<p>
At present I am chiefly concerned to drive home
the fact that it is the great <emph>disparity</emph> between the
rapid progress of the natural and technological
sciences on the one hand and the slow progress of
the metaphysical, so-called social <q>sciences</q> on the
other hand, that sooner or later so disturbs the
equilibrium of human affairs as to result periodically
in those social cataclysms which we call insurrections,
revolutions and wars. The reader should note
carefully that such cataclysmic changes&mdash;such
<q>jumps,</q> as we may call them&mdash;such violent readjustments
<pb n="023"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>
in human affairs and human relationships&mdash;are
recorded throughout the history of mankind.
And I would have him see clearly that, because the
<emph>disparity</emph> which produces them increases as we pass
from generation to generation&mdash;from term to term
of our progressions&mdash;the <q>jumps</q> in question occur
not only with increasing violence but with increasing
frequency. This highly significant fact may be
graphically illustrated in the following figure:
</p>

<figure url="images/023-1.png" rend="width: 100%">
  <head>Geometric evolution of the natural and technological sciences.&mdash;Peaceful
        progress.</head>
  <figDesc>
    A horizontal line, with numbers 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 above, and markings
    <hi rend='italic'>a'</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>,
    <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>,
    <hi rend='italic'>d</hi> in the corresponding locations below.
  </figDesc>
</figure>
<figure url="images/023-2.png" rend="width: 100%">
  <head>Arithmetical evolution of the so-called social <q>sciences,</q>
        accelerated by violent <q>jumps.</q>&mdash;Non-peaceful social progress.</head>
  <figDesc>
    A horizontal line, again marked with numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, but with gaps
    between 6 and (unprinted) 7, 8 and (unprinted) 9, 10 and (unprinted) 11.
    Above are markings: <hi rend='italic'>A'</hi> above 2 and <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>
    above 4; <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> above 6 and <hi rend='italic'>C</hi>
    above 7; <hi rend='italic'>D</hi> above 8 and <hi rend='italic'>E</hi>
    above 9; <hi rend='italic'>F</hi> above 10 and <hi rend='italic'>G</hi>
    at the far right end.  The steady progress areas, 2 to 4, 7 to 8, 9 to 10,
    are marked <q>Peaceful</q>, while the gaps are labeled <q>Jump, Revolution
    or War.</q>
  </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>a'2</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>2a</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ab</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>bc</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>cd</hi>, represent the geometrical law
of progression in the natural and technological
sciences (peaceful evolution).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A'2</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>2A</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>AB</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>CD</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>EF</hi>, represent the lagging
arithmetical law of progression in the so-called social
sciences (peaceful evolution).
</p>

<p>
Both of these during the same periods of time.
</p>

<pb n="024"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>BC</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>DE</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>FG</hi>,
represent revolutions or wars, with
the aftermath of revolution of ideas&mdash;the <q>jump</q>&mdash;violent
readjustment of ideas to facts&mdash;forced by
events.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>ab</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>bc</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>cd</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>AB</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>CD</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>EF</hi>, take the same amount
of time, but the second progression being much
slower than the first one, the <q>jumps</q> or revolutions
occur at shorter intervals as time goes on and thus
more frequently force us to coordinate our ideas to
facts. Periods of peace or seeming peace alternate
more and more frequently with periods of violence;
the mentioned <emph>disparity</emph> of progress in peaceful times
is the hatching seed of future violence.<note place="foot"><p>To
digress a bit, it may be interesting to add, that population
and the need of people increase in a geometrical progression;
and also that the growth of individuals is limited by the
fact, that they have to absorb their food through surfaces
which as growth goes on increase only as <emph>squares</emph>, while the
bodies to be fed, being volumes, increase in size as <emph>cubes</emph> increase,
as the cubes of the same base grow faster than the squares,
</p>
<p>
2<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> = 4,
2<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi> = 8,
3<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> = 9,
3<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi> = 27, and so on,
</p>
<p>
it is obvious, that in the infancy of an organism only a part of
the food goes to maintain life, the larger part goes for growth;
when the organism becomes larger, the absorbing surfaces,
growing proportionally to the square, the food is spent to build
the mass of the volume of the body and is spent proportionally
to the cube. Suppose our organism has grown to a size twice
as large, its absorbing capacity has become four times larger,
its volume eight times larger. In case of 3 times, the difference
will be 9 and 27. It is obvious that at some point, all the
absorbed food will be used to maintain life and none will be
left for growth, and this last process will stop. This is another
example which explains how the theory of dimensions is vitally
important in life and shows why it is absolutely essential to
take account of dimensions in the study of life problems.
</p></note>
</p>

<pb n="025"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>

<p>
As a matter of fact these few mathematical considerations
can hardly be called mathematics or
mathematical philosophy; nevertheless, without
bringing attention to these very simple mathematical
ideas we should not be able to proceed any further
than in the past. Our life problems have always been
<q>solved</q> by verbalists and rhetorical metaphysicians
who cleverly played with vague words and who
always ignored the supremely important matter of
dimensions because they were ignorant of it. There
was no possible way to arrive at an agreement on
the significance of words, or even the understanding
of them. Let us take, for instance, such words as
<q>good</q> or <q>bad</q> or <q>truth;</q> volumes upon volumes
have been written about them; no one has reached
any result universally acceptable; the effect has been
to multiply warring schools of philosophy&mdash;sectarians
and partisans. In the meantime <emph>something</emph>
corresponding to each of the terms <q>good,</q> <q>bad,</q>
<q>truth</q> exists as matter of fact; but what that something
is still awaits scientific determination. If only
these three words could be scientifically defined, philosophy,
law, ethics and psychology would cease to
be <q>private theories</q> or verbalism and they would
advance to the rank and dignity of sciences.
</p>

<p>
Here I may quote a characteristic of life as expressed
by one of the <q>heroes</q> of my esteemed
friend Harvey O'Higgins, in his book, <hi rend='italic'>From the
<pb n="026"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>
Life, Imaginary Portraits of Some Distinguished
Americans</hi> (Harper, N. Y.).
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Warren never philosophized; he handled facts as an
artisan handles his tools; but if he <emph>had</emph> philosophized, his
theory of life would probably have been something like this:
<q>There is no justice, there is no morality, in nature or in
natural laws; justice and morality are laws only of human
society. But society, natural life, and all civilization are
subject in their larger aspects to natural laws&mdash;which contradict
morality and outrage justice&mdash;and the statesman has
to move with those laws and direct his people in accordance
with them, despite the lesser by-laws of morality and justice.</q></q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
If such are the creeds of <q>distinguished people</q>
anywhere, what better can we expect than that which
we see in the history of humanity?
</p>

<p>
But the fact that the old philosophy, law, ethics,
psychology, politics and sociology could not solve the
practical problems of humanity, is not any reason
whatsoever why we should despair. The problems
can be solved.
</p>

<p>
To follow the reasoning of this book, it is not
necessary to be a highly trained specialist; the only
qualifications required are candor, an open mind,
freedom from blinding prejudice, thoughtfulness, a
real desire for truth, and enough common sense to
understand that to talk of adding three quarts of
milk to three-quarters of a mile is to talk nonsense.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="027"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter II. Childhood of Humanity"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter II. Childhood of Humanity"/>
<head>Chapter II. Childhood of Humanity</head>

<p>
The conclusion of the World War is the closing
of the period of the childhood of humanity.
This childhood, as any childhood, can be characterized
as devoid of any real understanding of values,
as is that of a child who uses a priceless chronometer
to crack nuts.
</p>

<p>
This childhood has been unduly long, but happily
we are near to the end of it, for humanity, shaken
by this war, is coming to its senses and must soon
enter its manhood, a period of great achievements
and rewards in the new and real sense of values
dawning upon us.
</p>

<p>
The sacred dead will not have died for naught;
the <q>red wine of youth,</q> the wanton waste of life,
has shown us the price of life, and we will have to
keep our oath to make the future worthy of their
sweat and blood.
</p>

<p>
Early ideas are not necessarily true ideas.
</p>

<p>
There are different kinds of interpretations of
history and different schools of philosophy. All of
them have contributed something to human progress,
but none of them has been able to give the world a
<pb n="028"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>
basic philosophy embracing the whole progress of
science and establishing the life of man upon the
abiding foundation of Fact.
</p>

<p>
Our life is bound to develop according to evident
or else concealed laws of nature. The evident laws
of nature were the inspiration of genuine science in
its cradle; and their interpretations or misinterpretations
have from the earliest times formed systems
of law, of ethics, and of philosophy.
</p>

<p>
Human intellect, be it that of an individual or
that of the race, forms conclusions which have to be
often revised before they correspond approximately
to facts. What we call progress consists in coordinating
ideas with realities. The World War has
taught something to everybody. It was indeed a
great reality; it accustomed us to think in terms of
reality and not in those of phantom speculation.
Some unmistakable truths were revealed. Facts and
force were the things that counted. Power had to
be produced to destroy hostile power; it was found
that the old political and economic systems were not
adequate to the task put upon them. The world had
to create new economic conditions; it was obliged
to supplement the old systems with special boards
for food, coal, railroads, shipping, labor, etc. The
World War emergency compelled the nations to organize
for producing greater power in order to conquer
power already great.
</p>

<pb n="029"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>

<p>
If there is anything which this war has proved, it
is the fact that the most important asset a nation or
an individual can have, is the ability <q>to do things.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In Flanders Fields the poppies blow ...,</q> that
is too true; they blow and they are strong and red.
But the purpose of this writing is not the celebration
of poetry, but the elucidation and right use of
facts.
</p>

<p>
Normally, thousands of rabbits and guinea pigs
are used and killed, in scientific laboratories, for
experiments which yield great and tangible benefits
to humanity. This war butchered millions of people
and ruined the health and lives of tens of millions.
Is this climax of the pre-war civilization to be passed
unnoticed, except for the poetry and the manuring
of the battle fields, that the <q>poppies blow</q> stronger
and better fed? Or is the death of ten men on the
battle field to be of as much worth in knowledge
gained as is the life of one rabbit killed for experiment?
Is the great sacrifice worth analysing?
There can be only one answer&mdash;yes. But, if truth
be desired, the analysis must be scientific.
</p>

<p>
In science, <q>opinions</q> are tolerated when and
only when facts are lacking. In this case, we have
all the facts necessary. We have only to collect them
and analyse them, rejecting mere <q>opinions</q> as cheap
and unworthy. Such as understand this lesson will
know how to act for the benefit of all.
</p>

<pb n="030"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>

<p>
At present the future of mankind is dark. <q>Stop,
look, and listen</q>&mdash;the prudent caution at railroad
crossings&mdash;must be amended to read <q>stop, look,
listen, and <hi rend='sc'>think</hi></q>; not for the saving of a few lives
in railroad accidents, but for the preservation of the
life of humanity. Living organisms, of the lower
and simpler types, in which the differentiation and
the integration of the vital organs have not been
carried far, can move about for a considerable time
after being deprived of the appliances by which the
life force is accumulated and transferred, but higher
organisms are instantly killed by the removal of such
appliances, or even by the injury of minor parts of
them; even more easily destroyed are the more advanced
and complicated <emph>social</emph> organizations.
</p>

<p>
The first question is: what are to be the scientific
methods that will eliminate diverse opinions and
creeds from an analysis of facts and ensure correct
deductions based upon them? A short survey of
facts concerning civilization will help to point the
way.
</p>

<p>
Humanity, in its cradle, did not have science; it
had only the faculties of observation and speculation.
In the early days there was much speculative thinking,
but it was without any sufficient basis of facts.
Theology and philosophy flourished; their speculations
were often very clever, but all their primitive
notions about facts&mdash;such as the structure of the
<pb n="031"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>
heavens, the form of the earth, mechanical principles,
meteorological or physiological phenomena&mdash;were
almost all of them wrong.
</p>

<p>
What is history? What is its significance for
humanity? Dr. J. H. Robinson gives us a precise
answer: <q>Man's abject dependence on the past gives
rise to the continuity of history. Our convictions,
opinions, prejudices, intellectual tastes; our knowledge,
our methods of learning and of applying for
information we owe, with slight exceptions, to the
past&mdash;often to the remote past. History is an expansion
of memory, and like memory it alone can
explain the present and in this lies its most unmistakable
value.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend='italic'>An Outline of
the History of the Western European Mind</hi>, by
James Harvey Robinson. The New School for Social Research,
New York, 1919. This little volume gives condensed statements,
as in a nutshell, of the historical developments of the
human mind and contains a long list of the most substantial
modern books on historical questions. All the further historical
quotations will be taken from this exceptionally valuable little
book, and for convenience they will simply be marked by his
initials&mdash;J. H. R.</note>
</p>

<p>
The savage regards every striking phenomenon or
group of phenomena as caused by some personal
agent, and from remotest antiquity the mode of thinking
has changed only as fast as the relations among
phenomena have been established.<note place="foot">(J. H. R.)
<q>Late appearance of a definite theory of progress.
Excessive conservatism of primitive peoples. The Greeks
speculated on the origin of things, but they did not have a conception
of the possibility of indefinite progress ... Progress
of man from the earliest time till the opening of the 17th century
almost altogether unconscious.... Fundamental weakness of
Hellenic learning. It was an imposing collection of speculation,
opinions, and guesses, which, however brilliant and ingenious
they might be, were based on a very slight body of exact knowledge,
and failed to recognize the fundamental necessity of
painful scientific research, aided by apparatus. There was no
steady accumulation of knowledge to offset the growing emotional
distrust of reason.... Unfulfilled promise of Hellenistic
science. Influence of slavery in checking the development of
science.... The deficiencies of Medieval culture. All the
weaknesses of the Hellenic reasoning, combined with those of
the Christian Fathers, underlay what appeared to be a most
logically elaborated and definitive system of thought. Defects
of the university education.... Little history of Natural
science, in our sense of the word, taught in the universities.... Copernicus,
<q>De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium.</q> Libri
VI, 1543.... Copernicus' own introduction acknowledges
his debt to ancient philosophers. Still believed in fixed Starry
Sphere. His discovery had little immediate effect on prevailing
notions. Giordano Bruno (1548-1600) made it his chief
business to think out and set forth in Latin and Italian the
implications of the discovery of Copernicus.... Bruno burned
by the Inquisition at Rome.... Keppler (1571-1630) and
his discovery of the elliptical orbits of the planets. Galileo
(1564-1642). His telescope speedily improved so as to magnify
32 diameters. His attitude toward the Copernican theory,
which was condemned by Roman Inquisition 1616.... Galileo's
chief discoveries were in physics and mechanics.
Isaac Newton (1642-1727) proved that the laws of falling
bodies apply to the heavens. This made a deep impression
and finally the newer conceptions of the universe began to be
popularized.... Lord Bacon (1561-1626), the <q>Buccinator</q>
of experimental and applied modern science.... His lively
appreciation of the existing obstacles to scientific advance; the
idols of the tribe, cave, market-place, and theatre.... Necessity
of escaping from the scholastic methods of <q>tumbling up
and down in our reasons and conceits,</q> and studying the world
about us. Undreamed of achievements possible if only the
right method of research be followed ... the distrust of
ancient authority.... Descartes (1596-1650), ... he proposed
to reach the truth through analysis and clear ideas, on
the assumption that God will not deceive.... His fundamental
interest in mathematics.... His claim to originality and his
rejection of all authority.... Obstacles to scientific advance;
the universities still dominated by Aristotle; the theological
faculties; the censorship of the press exercised by both church
and state; ...</q></note>
</p>

<pb n="032"/><anchor id="Pg032"/>

<p>
Human nature was always asking <q>why</q>? and not
being able to answer why, they found their answer
<pb n="033"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
through another factor <q>who.</q> The unknown was
called, Gods or God. But with the progress of
science the <q>why</q> became more and more evident,
and the question came to be <q>how.</q> From the early
days of humanity, dogmatic theology, law, ethics,
and science in its infancy, were the monopolies of one
class and the source of their power.<note place="foot"><p>(J. H. R.)
<q rend="pre">Phases of religious complex. <q>Religious,</q> a
vague and comprehensive term applied to: (1) certain classes
of emotions (awe, dependence, self-distrust, aspirations, etc.);
(2) Conduct, which may take the form of distinctive religious
acts (ceremonies, sacrifices, prayers, <q>good works</q>) or the
observance of what in primitive conditions are recognized as
<q>taboos</q>; (3) Priestly, or ecclesiastical organizations; (4)
Beliefs about supernatural beings and man's relations to them:
the latter may take the form of revelation and be reduced to
creeds and become the subject of elaborate theological speculations.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Association of religion with the supernatural; religion has
always had for its primary object the attainment of a satisfactory
adjustment to, or a successful control over, the supernatural.... The
cultural mind viewed as the product of a
long and hazardous process of accumulation.... Spontaneous
generation of superstitions. Prevalence of symbolism, mana,
animism, magic, fetishism, totemism; the taboo (cf. our modern
idea of <q>principle</q>), the sacred, clean and unclean; <q>dream
logic</q>&mdash;spontaneous rationalizing or <q>jumping at conclusions</q>;... The
16th book of the Theodosian Code contains edicts
relating to the Church issued by the Roman Emperors during
the 4th and 5th centuries. They make it a crime to disagree
with the Church; they provide harsh penalties for heretical
teaching and writing, and grant privileges to the orthodox
clergy (exemptions from regular taxes and benefit of the clergy).... Christianity
becomes a monopoly defended by the state.... Psychological
power and attraction in the elaborate
symbolism and ritual of the church.... Allegory put an end
to all literary criticism.... Flourishing of the miraculous;
any unusual or startling occurrence attributed to the intervention
of either God or the Devil.... Older conceptions of
disease as caused by the Devil.... Our legal expression
<q>act of God</q> confined to unforseeable natural disasters. How
with a growing appreciation for natural law and a chastened
taste in wonders, miracles have tended to become a source of
intellectual distress and bewilderment.... Protestants shared
with Roman Catholics the horror of <q>rationalists</q> and <q>free-thinkers.</q>
The leaders of both parties agreed in hampering
and denouncing scientific discoveries.... Witchcraft in its
modern form emerges clearly in the 15th century.... Great
prevalence of witchcraft during the 16th and 17th centuries in
Protestant and Catholic countries, alike.... Trial of those
suspected of sorcery. Tortures to force confession. The
witches' mark. Penalties, burning alive, strangling, hanging.
Tens of thousands of innocent persons perished.... Those
who tried to discredit witchcraft denounced as <q>Sadducees</q>
and atheists.... The psychology of intolerance. Fear, vested
interests, the comfortable nature of the traditional and the
habitual. The painful appropriation of new ideas.... The
intolerance of the Catholic Church: a natural result of its state-like
organization and claims.... Its doctrine of exclusive
salvation and its conception of heresy both sanctioned by the
state. Doubt and error regarded as sinful.... Beginnings
of censorship of the press after the invention of printing, licensing
of ecclesiastical and civil authorities.... Protestants of
16th century accept the theory of intolerance.</q></p></note>
</p>

<pb n="034"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>

<p>
The first to break this power were the exact
sciences. They progressed too rapidly to be bound
and limited by obscure old writings and prejudices;
life and realities were their domain. Science brushed
aside all sophistry and became a reality. Ethics is
too fundamentally important a factor in civilization
to depend upon a theological or a legal excuse;
<pb n="035"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>
ethics must conform to the <emph>natural</emph> laws of human
<emph>nature</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Laws, legal ideas, date from the beginning of
civilization. Legal speculation was wonderfully developed
in parallel lines with theology and philosophy
before the natural and exact sciences came
into existence. Law was always made by the few
and in general for the purpose of preserving the
<q>existing order,</q> or for the reestablishment of the
old order and the punishment of the offenders
against it.
</p>

<p>
Dogmatic theology is, by its very nature, unchangeable.
The same can be said in regard to the
spirit of the law. Law was and is to protect the
past and present status of society and, by its very
essence, must be very conservative, if not reactionary.
Theology and law are both of them static by their
nature.<note place="foot">(J. H. R.) <q>The
Socio-psychological foundations of conservatism:
Primitive natural reverence for the familiar and habitual
greatly reenforced by religion and law. Natural conservatism
of all professions. Those who suffer most from existing institutions
commonly, helplessly accept the situation as inevitable.
Position of the conservative; he urges the impossibility of altering
<q>human nature</q> and warns against the disasters of revolution.
Conservatism in the light of history: History would seem
to discredit conservatism completely as a working principle in
view of the past achievements of mankind in the recent past
and the possibilities which opened before us.... Futility of
the appeal of the conservative to human nature as an obstacle
to progress.... Culture can not be transmitted hereditarily
but can be accumulated through education and modified indefinitely.</q></note>
</p>

<pb n="036"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>

<p>
Philosophy, law and ethics, to be effective in a
dynamic world must be dynamic; they must be made
vital enough to keep pace with the progress of life
and science. In recent civilization ethics, because
controlled by theology and law, which are static,
could not duly influence the dynamic, revolutionary
progress of technic and the steadily changing conditions
of life; and so we witness a tremendous downfall
of morals in politics and business. Life progresses
faster than our ideas, and so medieval ideas,
methods and judgments are constantly applied to
the conditions and problems of modern life. This
discrepancy between facts and ideas is greatly responsible
for the dividing of modern society into different
warring classes, which do not understand each
other. Medieval legalism and medieval morals&mdash;the
basis of the old <emph>social</emph> structure&mdash;being by their
nature conservative, reactionary, opposed to change,
and thus becoming more and more unable to support
the mighty social burden of the modern world, must
be adjudged responsible in a large measure for the
circumstances which made the World War inevitable.
</p>

<p>
Under the flash of explosives some of the workings
of those antiquated ideas were exposed or
crushed. The World War has profoundly changed
economic conditions and made it necessary to erect
new standards of values. We are forced to realize
that evolution by transformation is a cosmic process
<pb n="037"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>
and that reaction, though it may retard it, can not
entirely stop it.<note place="foot">(J. H. R.)
<q>Formulation and establishment of the evolutionary
hypothesis. Discovery of the great age of the earth; ...
gradual development of the evolutionary theory....
Darwin's <q>Origin of the Species,</q> 1859. Herbert Spencer
(1820-1903).... Haeckel (1834-1919) and others clarify,
defend and popularize the new doctrine. Subsequent development
of the evolutionary doctrine by Mendel, Weisman, DeVries
and others. Weakening of the special creation theory by other
evidence such as archeology and biblical criticism. The significance
of the doctrine for intellectual history. Character of the
opposition to the evolutionary theory. Popular confusion of
<q>Darwinism</q> with <q>evolution.</q> Revolutionary effects of the
new point of view. Does away with conception of fixed species
(Platonic ideas) that had previously dominated speculation.
The genetic method adopted in all the organic sciences, including
the newer social sciences. Problem of adjusting history to the
discoveries of the past 50 years. Bearing of evolution on the
theory of progress. Organic evolution and social evolution.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The idea that organic species are results of special
creation has no scientific standard whatever. There
is not one fact tending to prove special or separate
creation; the evidence, which is overwhelming, is all
of it on the other side. The hypothesis of special
creation is a mere fossil of the past. Evolution is
the only theory which is in harmony with facts and
with all branches of science: life is dynamic, not
static.
</p>

<p>
Philosophy, as defined by Fichte, is the <q>science
of sciences.</q> Its aim was to solve the problems of
the world. In the past, when all exact sciences were
in their infancy, philosophy had to be purely speculative,
with little or no regard to realities. But if
<pb n="038"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>
we regard philosophy as a Mother science, divided
into many branches, we find that those branches have
grown so large and various, that the Mother science
looks like a hen with her little ducklings paddling
in a pond, far beyond her reach; she is unable to
follow her growing hatchlings. In the meantime,
the progress of life and science goes on, irrespective
of the cackling of metaphysics. Philosophy does not
fulfill her initial aim to bring the results of experimental
and exact sciences together and to solve world
problems. Through endless, scientific specialization
scientific branches multiply, and for want of coordination
the great world-problems suffer. This failure
of philosophy to fulfill her boasted mission of scientific
coordination is responsible for the chaos in the
world of general thought. The world has no collective
or organized higher ideals and aims, nor
even fixed general purposes. Life is an accidental
game of private or collective ambitions and
greeds.<note place="foot">(J. H. R.) <q>The
Deists and philosophers destroy the older
theological anthropology and reassert the dignity of man; the
growth of criticism and liberalism has made the analysis of
social institutions somewhat less dangerous; the general growth
of knowledge has reacted in a stimulating way upon the sciences
of society; the great increase in the number, complexity and
intensity of social problems has proved a strong incentive to
social science; The Darwinian hypothesis has rendered preposterous
any conception of a wholly static social system. However,
the modern social sciences in our capitalistic order meet
much the same resistance from the <q>vested interests</q> that
theological radicalism encountered in the Middle Ages, and
social science has in no way approached the objectivity and
progressiveness of present day natural science.... Grave
effects of vested rights in hampering experiments and readjustments....
Obstacles to readjustment presented by consecrated
traditions.... Influence of modern commercialism in the
inordinate development of organization and regimentation in
our present educational system. Psychological disadvantages
of our conventional examination system. As yet our education
has not been brought into close relation with prevailing conditions
of our ever increasing knowledge.... Excellent aims
and small achievements of sociology in practical results.
(<emph>Because of absolute lack of any scientific base.</emph> Author.) General
nature of the problem of social reform: psychological
problems involved in social reform movements: violent resistance
of the group to that criticism of the existing institutions,
which must precede any effective social reform....</q></note>
</p>

<pb n="039"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>

<p>
Systematic study of chemical and physical phenomena
has been carried on for many generations
and these two sciences now include: (1) knowledge
of an enormous number of facts; (2) a large body
of natural laws; (3) many fertile working hypotheses
respecting the causes and regularities of natural
phenomena; and finally (4) many helpful theories
held subject to correction by further testing of the
hypotheses giving rise to them. When a subject is
spoken of as a science, it is understood to include
all of the above mentioned parts. Facts alone do
not constitute a science any more than a pile of
stones constitutes a house, not even do facts and laws
alone; there must be facts, hypotheses, theories and
laws before the subject is entitled to the rank of a
science.
</p>

<p>
The primal function of a science is to enable us
to anticipate the future in the field to which it relates.
<pb n="040"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>
Judged by this standard, neither philosophy nor its
kindred&mdash;the so-called social sciences&mdash;have in the
past been very effective. There was, for example,
no official warning of the coming of the World War&mdash;the
greatest of catastrophes. The future was not
anticipated because political philosophers did not
possess the necessary basis of knowledge. To be
just we must admit that philosophy has been but little
aided financially because it is commonly regarded as
unnecessary. The technical branches of science have
been strongly backed and generally supported by
those to whom they have brought direct profit; and
so they have had better opportunities for development.
</p>

<p>
Ethics in the stifling grip of myth and legalism
is not convincing enough to exercise controlling influence.
Such is the situation in which we find ourselves.
Being still in our childhood and thinking like
savages, we looked upon the World War as a personal
creation of a <q>war-lord,</q> because those interested
in it told us so. We neglected to use our common
sense and look deeper into its origins; to perform
for ourselves the duty which political philosophy
did not perform for us&mdash;the duty of thinking
in terms of facts and not in terms of metaphysical
speculations. Knowledge of facts would
have told us that the war lords were only the representatives
of the ruling classes. A system of social
<pb n="041"/><anchor id="Pg041"/>
and economic order built exclusively on selfishness,
greed, <q>survival of the fittest,</q> and ruthless competition,
must cease to exist, or exist by means of war.
The representatives of this system determined to continue
to exist, and so war was the consequence. The
ruling classes carried the whole system under which
they lived to its logical conclusion and natural issue,
which is <q>grab what you can.</q> This motto is not
peculiar to any one country; it is the motto of our
whole civilization and is the inevitable outcome of
our stupid philosophy regarding the characteristic
nature of man and the proper potentialities of human
life. Where are we to find the true doctrines?
Where the true philosophy? If we go back over the
history of civilization, we find that in all <q>sciences,</q>
except the exact ones, private opinions and theories
have shaped our beliefs, colored our mental processes
and controlled our destinies; we see, for example,
pessimism opposed to optimism, materialism
to spiritualism, realism to idealism, capitalism to
socialism, and so on endlessly. Each of the disputatious
systems has a large number of followers and
each faction looks upon the others as deprived of
truth, common sense and knowledge. All of them
play with the words <q>natural law</q> which they ignorantly
presume to have as the basis and content of
their own particular doctrine.
</p>

<p>
It is the same in the realm of religions; there are
<pb n="042"/><anchor id="Pg042"/>
approximately 291 million Confucianists, or Taoists,
261 million Roman Catholics, 211 million Mohammedans,
209 million Hindus, 177 million Protestants,
157 million Animists, 137 million Buddhists,
115 million Orthodox Christians&mdash;to speak only of
the most important religions. Each group, and they
are rather large groups, believes its theory or its
faith to be infallible and all the others to be false.
</p>

<p>
Bacon seems a bit remote, but the idols and
medieval fetishes which he so masterfully describes
are equally venerated to-day.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Novum Organum</hi>, by Francis Bacon.)
</p>
<p>
34. <q rend="pre">Four species of idols beset the human mind, to which
(for distinction's sake) we have assigned names, calling the
first Idols of the Tribe, the second Idols of the Den, the
third Idols of the Market, the fourth Idols of the Theatre.</q>
</p>
<p>
40. <q rend="pre">The information of notions and axioms on the foundation
of true induction is the only fitting remedy by which
we can ward off and expel these idols. It is, however, of
great service to point them out; for the doctrine of idols
bears the same relation to the interpretation of nature as
that of the confutation of sophisms does to common logic.</q>
</p>
<p>
41. <q rend="pre">The idols of the tribe are inherent in human nature
and the very tribe or race of man; for man's sense is falsely
asserted to be the standard of things; on the contrary, all
the perceptions both of the senses and the mind bear reference
to man and not to the Universe, and the human mind resembles
these uneven mirrors which impart their own properties
to different objects, from which rays are emitted and
distort and disfigure them.</q>
</p>
<p>
42. <q rend="pre">The idols of the den are those of each individual;
for everybody (in addition to the errors common to the race
<pb n="043"/><anchor id="Pg043"/>
of man) has his own individual den or cavern, which intercepts
and corrupts the light of nature, either from his own
peculiar and singular disposition, or from his education and
intercourse with others, or from his reading, and the
authority acquired by those whom he reverences and admires,
or from the different impressions produced on the mind, as
it happens to be preoccupied and predisposed, or equable and
tranquil, and the like; so that the spirit of man (according
to its several dispositions), is variable, confused, and, as it
were, actuated by chance; and Heraclitus said well that men
search for knowledge in lesser worlds, and not in the greater
or common world.</q>
</p>
<p>
43. <q rend="pre">There are also idols formed by the reciprocal intercourse
and society of man with man, which we call idols
of the market, from the commerce and association of men
with each other; for men converse by means of language,
but words are formed at the will of the generality, and there
arises from a bad and unapt formation of words a wonderful
obstruction to the mind. Nor can the definitions and explanations
with which learned men are wont to guard and
protect themselves in some instances afford a complete
remedy&mdash;words still manifestly force the understanding,
throw everything into confusion, and lead mankind into vain
and innumerable controversies and fallacies.</q>
</p>
<p>
44. <q>Lastly, there are idols which have crept into men's
minds from the various dogmas of peculiar systems of philosophy,
and also from the perverted rules of demonstration,
and these we denominate idols of the theatre: for we regard
all the systems of philosophy hitherto received or imagined,
as so many plays brought out and performed, creating
fictitious and theatrical worlds. Nor do we speak only of the
present systems, or of the philosophy and sects of the ancients,
since numerous other plays of a similar nature can be still
composed and made to agree with each other, the causes
of the most opposite errors being generally the same. Nor,
<pb n="044"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>
again, do we allude merely to general systems, but also to
many elements and axioms of sciences which have become
inveterate by tradition, implicit credence, and
neglect.</q><note place="foot">(J. H. R.)
<q>During the past two centuries the application
of the scientific discoveries to daily life has revolutionized
our methods of supplying our economic needs, our social and
intellectual life, and the whole range of the relations of mankind.
The impulse of invention, iron, coal, and steam essential to the
development of machinery on a large scale; machinery has in
turn begotten the modern factory with its vast organized labor,
the modern city and finally, our well nigh perfect means of
rapid human inter-communication. The tremendous increase
in the production of wealth and the growing interdependence of
nations has opened up a vast range of speculation in regard to
the betterment of mankind to the abolition or reduction of poverty,
ignorance, disease, and war.... Man advances from a
tool-using to a machine-controlling animal. The rise of the
factory system; the concentration and localization of industry;
increased division of labor and specialization of industrial processes.
The great increase in the volume of capital and in the
extent of investments; the separation of capital and labor and
the growth of impersonal economic relationship. Problems of
capital and labor; unemployment and the labor of women and
children; labor organizations. Increased productivity and the
expansion of commerce. Industrial processes become dynamic
and everchanging&mdash;a complete reversal of the old stability, repetition
and isolation.</q></note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Metaphysical speculation and its swarming progeny
of blind and selfish political philosophies, private
opinions, private <q>truths,</q> and private doctrines,
sectarian opinions, sectarian <q>truths</q> and sectarian
doctrines, querulous, confused and blind&mdash;such is
characteristic of the <emph>childhood</emph> of humanity. The
period of humanity's <emph>manhood</emph> will, I doubt not, be
a scientific period&mdash;a period that will witness the
gradual extension of scientific method to all the interests
<pb n="045"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>
of mankind&mdash;a period in which man will discover
the essential nature of man and establish, at
length, the science and art of directing human
energies and human capacities to the advancement
of human weal in accordance with the laws of
human nature.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="046"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter III. Classes of Life"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter III. Classes of Life"/>
<head>Chapter III. Classes of Life</head>

<p>
The problems to be dealt with in this chapter
are not easy, but they are exceedingly important.
To classify phenomena correctly, they must
be correctly analysed and clearly defined. For the
sake of clearness I will use the simplest illustrations
and, avoiding as much as possible the difficulties of
technical terms, will use language easily to be understood
by every one. In some cases the words will
indeed have a technical meaning and it will be necessary
to exercise great care against the danger of
giving false impressions; for clear ideas are essential
to sound thinking. As a matter of fact our common
daily speech is ill adapted for the precise expression
of thought; even so-called <q>scientific</q> language is
often too vague for the purpose and requires further
refining. Some may say that it is useless and unnecessary
to lay so much stress on correct thinking
and precise expression; that it has no practical value;
for they say that <q>business</q> language is good enough
to <q>talk business,</q> or to put <q>something over</q> the
other fellow. But a little explanation will show that
precision is often of the greatest importance.
</p>

<pb n="047"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>

<p>
Humanity is a peculiar class of life which, in some
degree, determines its own destinies; therefore in
practical life <emph>words</emph> and
<emph>ideas</emph> become <emph>facts</emph>&mdash;facts,
moreover, which bring about important practical
consequences. For instance, many millions of human
beings have defined a stroke of lightning as being
the <q>punishment of God</q> of evil men; other millions
have defined it as a <q>natural, casual, periodical phenomenon</q>;
yet other millions have defined it as an
<q>electric spark.</q> What has been the result of
these <q>non-important</q> definitions in practical life?
In the case of the first definition, when lightning
struck a house, the population naturally made no
attempt to save the house or anything in it, because
to do so would be against the <q>definition</q> which proclaims
the phenomenon to be a <q>punishment for
evil,</q> any attempt to prevent or check the destruction
would be an impious act; the sinner would be guilty
of <q>resisting the supreme law</q> and would deserve to
be punished by death.
</p>

<p>
Now in the second instance, a stricken building is
treated just as any tree overturned by storm; the
people save what they can and try to extinguish the
fire. In both instances, the behavior of the populace
is the same in one respect; if caught in the open
by a storm they take refuge under a tree&mdash;a means
of safety involving maximum danger but the people
do not know it.
</p>

<pb n="048"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>

<p>
Now in the third instance, in which the population
have a scientifically correct definition of lightning,
they provide their houses with lightning rods;
and if they are caught by a storm in the open they
neither run nor hide under a tree; but when the
storm is directly over their heads, they put themselves
in a position of minimum exposure by lying flat
on the ground until the storm has passed.
</p>

<p>
Such examples could be given without end, but
there is another example of sufficient vital importance
to be given here, as it has to do with our conception
of the social and economic system, and the
state. If our institutions are considered <q>God-given</q>&mdash;sacred
and therefore static&mdash;every reformer
or advocate of change should be treated as
a criminal or <q>a danger to the existing order</q> and
hanged or at least put in jail for life. But now, if
our institutions are <q>man made,</q> imperfect and often
foolish, and subject to change all the time steadily
and dynamically in obedience to some known or unknown
law; then of course all reactionaries would
be a <q>danger to the natural order</q> and they should
be treated the same way. The importance of definitions
can be seen in all other fields of practical life;
definitions create conditions. To know the world in
which we live, we have to analyse facts by help of
such facts as we know in daily practice and such facts
as are established in scientific laboratories where men
<pb n="049"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>
do not jump to conclusions. In some places it will
be necessary to make statements that will have to
await full justification at a later stage of the discussion.
This will be necessary to indicate the trend
of the analysis.
</p>

<p>
The aim of the analysis is to give us just conceptions,
correct definitions, and true propositions. The
process is slow, progressive, and endless. The problems
are infinitely many, and it is necessary to select.
Fortunately the solution of a few leads automatically
to the solution of many others. Some of the greatest
and most far-reaching scientific discoveries have been
nothing else than a few correct definitions, a few
just concepts and a few true propositions. Such, for
example, was the work of Euclid, Newton and
Leibnitz&mdash;a few correct definitions, a few just concepts,
a few true propositions; but these have been
extended and multiplied, sometimes by men of creative
genius, and often almost automatically by men
of merely good sense and fair talent.
</p>

<p>
The matter of definition, I have said, is very important.
I am not now speaking of <emph>nominal</emph> definitions,
which for convenience merely give names to
known objects. I am speaking of such definitions
of phenomena as result from correct analysis of the
phenomena. Nominal definitions are mere conveniences
and are neither true nor false; but analytic
definitions are definitive <emph>propositions</emph> and are true
<pb n="050"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>
or else false. Let us dwell upon the matter a little
more.
</p>

<p>
In the illustration of the definitions of lightning,
there were three; the first was the most mistaken
and its application brought the most harm; the second
was less incorrect and the practical results less
bad; the third under the present conditions of our
knowledge, was the <q>true one</q> and it brought the
maximum benefit. This lightning illustration suggests
the important idea of <emph>relative</emph> truth and <emph>relative</emph>
falsehood&mdash;the idea, that is, of degrees of
truth and degrees of falsehood. A definition may
be neither absolutely true nor absolutely false; but
of two definitions of the same thing, one of them
may be truer or falser than the other.
</p>

<p>
If, for illustration's sake, we call the first <q>truth</q>
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, (alpha 1),
the second one <hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>
(alpha 2), the third one
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi>
(alpha 3), we may suppose that a genius
appears who has the faculty to surpass all the other
relative truths
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">1</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi>, ...
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> and gives us an
absolute or final truth, <hi rend="sc">valid in infinity</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">infinity</hi>) say a
final definition, that lightning is so ... and so ...,
a kind of energy which flows, let us say, through a
glass tube filled with charcoal. Then of course
this definition would immediately make obvious
what use could be made of it. We could erect
glass towers filled with charcoal and so secure an
unlimited flow of available free energy and our
<pb n="051"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>
whole life would be affected in an untold degree.
This example explains the importance of correct
definitions.
</p>

<p>
But to take another example: there is such a
thing as a phenomenon called the <q>color</q> red.
Imagine how it might be defined. A reactionary
would call it a <q>Bolshevik</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">1</hi>); a Bolshevik
would say <q>My color</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>); a color-blind person
would say <q>such a thing does not exist</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi>);
a Daltonist would say <q>that is green</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">4</hi>); a
metaphysician would say <q>that is the soul of whiskey</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">5</hi>);
an historian would say <q>that is the color of the ink with which human history has
been written</q> (<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">6</hi>);
an uneducated person would say <q>that is the color of blood</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">7</hi>); the modern
scientist would say <q>it is the light of such and such wave length</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">8</hi>).
If this last definition be <q>valid in infinity</q> or not we do not know,
but it is, nevertheless, a <q>scientific truth</q> in the present
condition of our knowledge.
</p>

<p>
This final but unknown <q>truth valid in infinity</q>
is somehow perceived or felt by us as an ideal, for
in countless years of observation we have formed
a series of less and less false, more and more nearly
true <q>ideas</q> about the phenomenon. The <q>ideas</q>
are <emph>reflexes</emph> of the phenomenon, reflected in our
midst as in a mirror; the reflexes may be distorted,
as in a convex or concave mirror, but they suggest
<pb n="052"/><anchor id="Pg052"/>
an ideal reflex valid in infinity. It is of the utmost
importance to realize that the words which are used
to express the ideas and the ideals are <hi rend="sc">the materialization</hi>
of the ideas and ideal; it is only by
words that we are enabled to give to other human
beings an exact or nearly exact impression which
we have had of the phenomenon.
</p>

<p>
It may be helpful to illustrate this process by an
example. Let us suppose that a man makes an
experiment of doing his own portrait from a mirror,
which may be plane, concave or convex. If he looks
into a plane mirror, he will see his true likeness;
even so, if he be a poor designer, he will draw the
likeness badly. Let us suppose that the man has
beautiful features but because the drawing is very
poor, it will not convey the impression that the
features of the original were beautiful. If this poor
designer were to look into and work from a concave
or convex mirror, the drawing of his likeness would
have practically no resemblance to his original
features.
</p>

<p>
For correct analysis and true definitions of the
cardinal classes of life in our world it is necessary
to have some just ideas about dimensions or dimensionality.
The Britannica gives us some help in
this connection. I will explain briefly by an example.
Measurable entities of different kinds can not be
compared directly. Each one must be measured in
<pb n="053"/><anchor id="Pg053"/>
terms of a unit of its own kind. A line can have
only length and therefore is of one dimension: a surface
has length and width and is therefore said to
have two dimensions; a volume has length, width and
thickness and is, therefore, said to have three dimensions.
If we take, for example, a volume&mdash;say a
cube&mdash;we see that the cube has surfaces and lines and
points, but a volume is not a surface nor a line nor
a point. Just these dimensional differences have an
enormous unrealized importance in practical life, as
in the case of taking a line of five units of length
and building upon it a square, the measure of this
square (surface) will not be 5, it will be 25; and
the 25 will not be 25 linear units but 25 square or
surface units. If upon this square we build a cube,
this cube will have neither 5 nor 25 for its measure;
it will have 125, and this number will not be so many
units of length nor of surface but so many solid or
cubic units.
</p>

<p>
It is as plain as a pike staff that, if we confused
<emph>dimensions</emph> when computing lengths and areas and
volumes, we would wreck all the architectural and
engineering structures of the world, and at the same
time show ourselves stupider than block-heads.
</p>

<p>
To analyse the classes of life we have to consider
two very different kinds of phenomena: the one
embraced under the collective name&mdash;Inorganic
chemistry&mdash;the other under the collective name&mdash;Organic
<pb n="054"/><anchor id="Pg054"/>
chemistry, or the chemistry of hydro-carbons.
These divisions are made because of the peculiar
properties of the elements chiefly involved in the
second class. The properties of matter are so distributed
among the elements that three of them&mdash;Oxygen,
Hydrogen, and Carbon&mdash;possess an ensemble
of unique characteristics. The number of
reactions in inorganic chemistry are relatively few,
but in organic chemistry&mdash;in the chemistry of these
three elements the number of different compounds is
practically unlimited. Up to 1910, we knew of more
than 79 elements of which the whole number of reactions
amounted to only a few hundreds, but among
the remaining three elements&mdash;Carbon, Hydrogen
and Oxygen&mdash;the reactions were known to be practically
unlimited in number and possibilities; this fact
must have very far reaching consequences. As far
as energies are concerned, we have to take them as
nature reveals them to us. Here more than ever,
mathematical thinking is essential and will help enormously.
The reactions in inorganic chemistry
always involve the phenomenon of heat, sometimes
light, and in some instances an unusual energy is
produced called electricity. Until now, the radioactive
elements represent a group too insufficiently
known for an enlargement here upon this subject.
</p>

<p>
The organic compounds being unlimited in number
and possibilities and with their unique characteristics,
<pb n="055"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>
represent of course, a different class of phenomena,
but being, at the same time, <emph>chemical</emph> they include
the basic chemical phenomena involved in all chemical
reactions, but being unique in many other respects,
they also have an infinitely vast field of unique
characteristics. Among the energetic phenomena of
organic chemistry, besides the few mentioned above
there are <hi rend="sc">new and unique</hi> energetic phenomena
occurring in this dimension.
</p>

<p>
Of these phenomena, mention may be made of
the phenomenon <q>life,</q> the phenomenon of the <q>instincts</q>
and of the <q>mind</q> in general. These energetic
phenomena are unique for the unique chemistry
of the three unique elements. It is obvious that this
<q>uniqueness</q> is the reason why these phenomena
must be classified as belonging to or having a higher
dimensionality than belongs to the phenomena of inorganic
chemistry just as the uniqueness of the properties
of a volume as compared with surface properties
depends upon the fact that a volume has a
higher dimensionality than a surface. Just as this
difference of dimensions makes the whole difference
between the geometry of volumes and the geometry
of surfaces, the difference between the two chemistries
involves a difference of dimensionality.
</p>

<p>
The higher energies of the chemistries of the
higher dimensionality are very difficult to define; my
descriptions are no better than the description of
<pb n="056"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>
life given by Professor Wilhelm Roux, in his <hi rend='italic'>Der
Kampf der Teile im Organismus</hi>, Leipzig, 1881,
which are equally unsatisfactory. In want of a better,
I quote him. He defines a living being as a natural
object which possesses the following nine characteristic
autonomous activities: Autonomous change,
Autonomous excretion, Autonomous ingestion, Autonomous
assimilation, Autonomous growth, Autonomous
movement, Autonomous multiplication, Autonomous
transmission of hereditary characteristics
and Autonomous development. The words <q>Autonomous
activities</q> are important because they hint
at the dimensional differences of these energies. But
a better word should be found to define the dimensional
differences between the activities found in
inorganic chemistry and those found in organic
chemistry. We see it is a mistake to speak about
<q>life</q> in a crystal, in the same sense in which we
use the word life to name the curious <hi rend="sc">autonomous</hi>
phenomenon of <hi rend="sc">organic chemistry, which is of
another dimension</hi> than the activities in inorganic
chemistry. For the so-called life in the crystals&mdash;the
<emph>not</emph> <hi rend="sc">autonomous</hi> (or anautonomous) activities
of crystals&mdash;another word than life should be found.
In the theory of crystals the term life is purely
rhetorical: its use there is very injurious to sound
science. These old ideas of <q>life</q> in crystals are
profoundly unscientific and serve as one of the best
<pb n="057"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>
examples of the frequent confusion or intermixing
of dimensions&mdash;a confusion due to unmathematical,
logically incorrect ways of thinking. If crystals
<q>live,</q> then <emph>volumes are surfaces</emph>, and 125 cubic
units=25 square units&mdash;absurdities belonging to the
<q>childhood of humanity.</q>
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q rend="pre">Crystals can grow in a proper solution, and can regenerate
their form in such a solution when broken or injured;
it is even possible to prevent or retard the formation of
crystals in a supersaturated solution by preventing <q>germs</q>
in the air from getting into the solution, an observation which
was later utilized by Schroeder and Pasteur in their experiments
on spontaneous generation. However, the analogies
between a living organism and a crystal are merely superficial
and it is by pointing out the fundamental differences between
the behavior of crystals and that of living organisms that
we can best understand the specific difference between non-living
and living matter. It is true that a crystal can grow,
but it will do so only in a supersaturated solution of its own
substance. Just the reverse is true for living organisms. In
order to make bacteria or the cells of our body grow, solutions
of the split products of the substances composing them
and not the substances themselves must be available to the
cells; second, these solutions must not be supersaturated, on
the contrary, they must be dilute; and third, growth leads
in living organisms to cell division as soon as the mass of
the cell reaches a certain limit. This process of cell division
can not be claimed even metaphorically to exist in a crystal.
A correct appreciation of these facts will give us an insight
into the specific difference between non-living and living matter.
The formation of living matter consists in the synthesis
of the proteins, nucleins, fats, and carbohydrates of the cells,
from split products....</q>
</p>

<pb n="058"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>

<p>
<q>The essential difference between living and non-living
matter consists then in this: the living cell synthesizes its
own complicated specific material from indifferent or non-specific
simple compounds of the surrounding medium, while
the crystal simply adds the molecules found in its supersaturated
solution. This synthetic power of transforming
small <q>building stones</q> into the complicated compounds
specific for each organism is the <q>secret of life</q> or rather one
of the secrets of life.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>The Organism as a Whole</hi>, by
Jacques Loeb.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
It will be explained later that one of the energetic
phenomena of organic chemistry&mdash;the <q>mind,</q>
which is one of the energies characteristic of this
class of phenomena, is <q>autonomous,</q> is <q>self-propelling</q>
and true to its dimensionality. If we
analyse the classes of life, we readily find that there
are three cardinal classes which are radically distinct
in function. A short analysis will disclose to us that,
though minerals have various activities, they are not
<q>living.</q> The plants have a very definite and well
known function&mdash;the transformation of solar energy
into organic chemical energy. They are a class of
life which appropriates one kind of energy, converts
it into another kind and stores it up; in that sense
they are a kind of storage battery for the solar
energy; and so I define <hi rend="sc">the plants as the chemistry-binding</hi>
class of life.
</p>

<p>
The animals use the highly dynamic products of
the <emph>chemistry-binding</emph> class&mdash;the plants&mdash;as food,
<pb n="059"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>
and those products&mdash;the results of plant-transformation&mdash;undergo
in animals a further transformation
into yet higher forms; and the animals are correspondingly
a more dynamic class of life; their energy
is kinetic; they have a remarkable freedom and
power which the plants do not possess&mdash;I mean the
freedom and faculty to move about in <emph>space</emph>; and so
I define <hi rend="sc">animals as the space-binding class of
life</hi>.
</p>

<p>
And now what shall we say of <emph>human</emph> beings?
What is to be our definition of Man? Like the animals,
human beings do indeed possess the <emph>space-binding</emph>
capacity but, over and above that, human
beings possess a most remarkable capacity which is
entirely peculiar to them&mdash;I mean the capacity to
summarise, digest and appropriate the labors and
experiences of the past; I mean the capacity to use
the fruits of past labors and experiences as intellectual
or spiritual capital for developments in the
present; I mean the capacity to employ as instruments
of increasing power the accumulated achievements
of the all-precious lives of the past generations
spent in trial and error, trial and success; I mean the
capacity of human beings to conduct their lives in
the ever increasing light of inherited wisdom; I mean
the capacity in virtue of which man is at once the
heritor of the by-gone ages and the trustee of posterity.
And because humanity is just this magnificent
<pb n="060"/><anchor id="Pg060"/>
natural agency by which the past lives in the
present and the present for the future, I define
<hi rend="sc">humanity</hi>, in the universal tongue of mathematics
and mechanics, to be the <hi rend="sc">time-binding class of
life</hi>.
</p>

<p>
These definitions of the cardinal classes of life
are, it will be noted, obtained from direct observation;
they are so simple and so important that I cannot
over-emphasize the necessity of grasping them
and most especially the definition of Man. For these
simple definitions and especially that of Humanity
will profoundly transform the whole conception of
human life in every field of interest and activity;
and, what is more important than all, the definition
of Man will give us a starting point for discovering
the <emph>natural</emph> laws of human nature&mdash;of the human
class of life. The definitions of the classes of life
represent the different classes as distinct in respect
to dimensionality; and this is extremely important
for no measure or rule of one class can be applied
to the other, <emph>without making grave mistakes</emph>. For
example, to treat a human being as an animal&mdash;as
a mere space-binder&mdash;because humans have certain
animal propensities, is an error of the same type and
grossness as to treat a cube as a surface because it
has surface properties. It is absolutely essential to
grasp that fact if we are ever to have a science
of human nature.
</p>

<pb n="061"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>

<p>
We can represent the different classes of life in
three life coordinates. The minerals, with their inorganic
activities would be the Zero (0) dimension
of <q>life</q>&mdash;that is the <emph>lifeless</emph> class&mdash;here represented
by the point <hi rend='italic'>M</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The plants, with their <q>autonomous</q> growth, to
be represented by the <hi rend="sc">one dimensional</hi> line <hi rend='italic'>MP</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The animals, with their <q>autonomous</q> capacity
to grow and to be active in space by the <hi rend="sc">two dimensional</hi>
plane <hi rend='italic'>PAM</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The humans, with their <q>autonomous</q> capacity to
grow, to be active in space <hi rend="sc">and to be active in
time</hi>, by the <hi rend="sc">three dimensional</hi>
region <hi rend='italic'>MAPH</hi>.
</p>

<figure url="images/061.png" rend="width: 100%">
  <figDesc>
    A drawing, like labeling the axes of a three-dimensional space.
    At the center is <q>(Minerals) M</q>.
    At the top of the Z axis is <q>H (Humans)</q>.
    At the end of the X axis is <q>P (Plants)</q>.
    At the end of the Y axis is <q>A (Animals)</q>.
  </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
Such diagrammatic illustrations must not be taken
too literally; they are like figures of speech&mdash;helpful
if understood&mdash;harmful if not understood. The
reader should reflect upon the simple idea of dimensions
<pb n="062"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>
until he sees clearly that the idea is not merely
a thing of interest or of convenience, but is absolutely
essential as a means of discriminating the cardinal
classes of life from one another and of conceiving
each class to be what it is instead of mixing
it confusedly with something radically different. It
will greatly help the reader if he will retire to the
quiet of his cloister and there meditate about as
follows. A line has one dimension; a plane has two;
a plane contains lines and so it has line properties&mdash;<emph>one</emph>-dimensional
properties&mdash;but it has other properties&mdash;<emph>two</emph>-dimensional
properties&mdash;and it is these
that are peculiar to it, give it its own character,
and make it what it is&mdash;a plane and not a line.
So animals have some plant properties&mdash;they
grow, for example&mdash;but animals have other properties&mdash;autonomous
mobility, for example,&mdash;properties
of higher dimensionality or type&mdash;and
it is these that make animals <emph>animals</emph> and not
plants. Just so, human beings have certain animal
properties&mdash;autonomous mobility, for example,
or physical appetites&mdash;but humans have other properties
or propensities&mdash;ethical sense, for example,
logical sense, inventiveness, progressiveness&mdash;properties
or propensities of higher dimensionality, level,
or type&mdash;and it is these propensities and powers
that make human beings <emph>human</emph> and <emph>not</emph> animal.
When and only when this fact is clearly seen and
<pb n="063"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>
keenly realized, there will begin the <emph>science of man</emph>&mdash;the
science and art of <emph>human nature</emph>&mdash;for then
and only then we shall begin to escape from the age-long
untold immeasurable evils that come from regarding
and treating human beings as animals, as
mere binders of space, and we may look forward
to an ethics, a jurisprudence and economics, a governance&mdash;a
science and art of human life and society&mdash;based
upon the laws of human nature because
based upon the just conception of humanity as the
time-binding class of life, creators and improvers of
good, destined to endless advancement, in accord
with the potencies of Human Nature.<note place="foot"><p>It may
be contended by some that animals have been making
<q>progress</q> or some may say that animals also <q>bind-time.</q>
This use of words would again become mere verbalism, a mere
talking about words&mdash;mere speculation having nothing to do
with <emph>facts</emph> or with correct thinking, in which there is no intermixing
of dimensions. The peculiar faculty belonging exclusively
to humans which I designate as <q>time-binding</q> I have clearly
defined as an <emph>exponential function</emph>
of <emph>time</emph> in the following chapter.
If people are pleased to talk about the <q>progress</q> of animals,
they can hardly fail to see clearly that it differs both in function
and in type or dimension from what is rightly meant by human
progress; human time-binding capacity lies in an entirely different
dimension from that of animals. So, if any persons wish
to talk of animal <q>progress</q> or animal <q>time-binding,</q> they
should invent a suitable word for it to save them from the
blunder of confusing types or mixing dimensions.</p>
<p>This mathematical discrimination between classes, types,
dimensions is of the utmost importance in the natural sciences,
because of the transmutation of species. To adjust the Darwin
theory to dimensionality is a somewhat more difficult problem;
it involves the concept of the <q>continuum</q>; but with the
modern theory of de Vries, these things are self evident. If
animals really progress, which is doubtful because they are an
older form of life than humans and they have not shown any
noticeable progress to the knowledge of man, their progress is
so small in comparison with man's that it may be said, in mathematical
terms, to be <emph>negligible</emph> as an infinitesimal of higher order.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n="064"/><anchor id="Pg064"/>

<p>
Humanity is still in its childhood; we have
<q>bound</q> so little time in the course of the centuries,
which are so brief in the scheme of the universe. At
the bottom of every human activity, historical fact
or trend of civilization, there lies some doctrine or
conception of so-called <q>truth.</q> Apples had fallen
from trees for ages, but without any important results
in the economy of humanity. The fact that a
fallen apple hit Newton, led to the discovery of the
theory of gravitation; this changed our whole world
conception, our sciences and our activities; it powerfully
stimulated the development of all the branches
of natural and technological knowledge. Even in
the event of the Newtonian laws being proved to be
not quite correct, they have served a great purpose
in enabling us to understand natural phenomena in
a sufficiently approximate way to make it possible to
build up modern technology and to develop our
physical science to the point where it was necessary
and possible to make a correction of the Newtonian
laws.
</p>

<p>
A similar organic change in our conception of
human life and its phenomena is involved in the foregoing
definitions of the classes of life; they will replace
basic errors with scientific truths of fundamental
<pb n="065"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>
importance; they will form the basis for scientific
development of a permanent civilization in place of
the periodically convulsive so-called civilizations of
the past and present. To know the cause of evil and
error is to find the cure.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="066"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter IV. What Is Man?"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter IV. What Is Man?"/>
<head>Chapter IV. What Is Man?</head>

<p>
Man has ever been the greatest puzzle to man.
There are many and important reasons for
this fact. As the subject of this book is not a theoretical,
academic study of man, of which too many
have already been written, I will not recount the
reasons, but will confine myself to the more pressing
matters of the task in hand, which is that of pointing
the way to the science and art of Human Engineering.
The two facts which have to be dealt with first,
are the two which have most retarded human progress:
(1) there has never been a true definition of
man nor a just conception of his rôle in the curious
drama of the world; in consequence of which there
has never been a proper principle or starting point
for a science of humanity. It has never been realized
that man is a being of a dimension or type different
from that of animals and the characteristic nature
of man has not been understood; (2) man has
always been regarded either as an animal or as a
supernatural phenomenon. The facts are that man
is not <emph>super</emph>natural but is literally a part of nature
<pb n="067"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>
and that human beings are not animals. We have
seen that the animals are truly characterized by
their autonomous mobility&mdash;their space-binding capacity&mdash;animals
are space-binders. We have seen
that human beings are characterized by their creative
power, by the power to make the past live in the
present and the present for the future, by their capacity
to bind time&mdash;human beings are time-binders.
These concepts are basic and impersonal; arrived
at mathematically, they are mathematically correct.
</p>

<p>
It does not matter at all <emph>how</emph> the first man, the
first time-binder, was produced; the fact remains
that he was somewhere, somehow produced. To
know anything that is to-day of fundamental interest
about man, we have to analyse man in three coordinates&mdash;in
three capacities; namely, his chemistry, his
activities in space, and especially his activities in
time; whereas in the study of animals we have to
consider only two factors: their chemistry and their
activities in space.
</p>

<p>
Let us imagine that the aboriginal&mdash;original
human specimen was one of two brother apes, <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>; they were alike in every respect; both were
animal space-binders; but something strange happened
to <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>; he became the first time-binder, a
human. No matter how, this <q>something</q> made the
change in him that lifted him to a higher dimension;
it is enough that in some-wise, over and above
<pb n="068"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>
his animal capacity for binding space, there was
superadded the marvelous new capacity for binding-time.
He had thus a new faculty, he belonged to
a new dimension; but, of course, he did not realize
it; and because he had this new capacity he was
able to analyze his brother <q><hi rend='italic'>A</hi></q>;
he observed <q><hi rend='italic'>A</hi>
is my brother; he is an animal; but he is my brother;
therefore, <hi rend="sc"><emph>I</emph> am an animal</hi>.</q>
This fatal first conclusion,
reached by false analogy, by neglecting a
fact, has been the chief source of human woe for
half a million years and it still survives. The time-binding
capacity, first manifest in <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>, increased more
and more, with the days and each generation, until
in the course of centuries man felt himself increasingly
somehow different from the animal, but he
could not explain. He said to himself, <q>If I
am an animal there is also in me something higher,
a spark of some thing <emph>super</emph>natural.</q>
</p>

<p>
With this conclusion he estranged himself, as
something apart from nature, and formulated the
impasse, which put him in a cul-de-sac of a double
life. He was neither true to the <q>supernatural</q>
which he could not know and therefore, could not
emulate, nor was he true to the <q>animal</q> which he
scorned. Having put himself outside the <q>natural
laws,</q> he was not really true to any law and condemned
himself to a life of hypocrisy, and established
speculative, artificial, unnatural laws.
</p>

<pb n="069"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>

<p>
<q>How blind our familiar assumptions make us!
Among the animals, man, at least, has long been
wont to regard himself as a being quite apart from
and not as part of the cosmos round about him.
From this he has detached himself in thought, he has
estranged and objectified the world, and lost the
sense that he is of it. And this age-long habit and
point of view, which has fashioned his life and controlled
his thought, lending its characteristic mark
and color to his whole philosophy and art and learning,
is still maintained, partly because of its convenience,
no doubt, and partly by force of inertia
and sheer conservatism, in the very teeth of the
strongest probabilities of biological science. Probably
no other single hypothesis has less to recommend
it, and yet no other so completely dominates
the human mind.</q> (Cassius J. Keyser, loc. cit.)
And this monstrous conception is current to-day:
millions still look upon man as a mixture of animal
and something supernatural.
</p>

<p>
There is no doubt that the engineering of human
society is a difficult and complicated problem of tremendous
ethical responsibility, for it involves the
welfare of mankind throughout an unending succession
of generations. The science of Human
Engineering can not be built upon false conceptions
of human nature. It can not be built on the conception
of man as a kind of animal; it can not be
<pb n="070"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>
built on the conception of man as a mixture of natural
and supernatural. It must be built upon the
conception of man as being at once natural and
higher in dimensionality than the animals. It must
be built upon the scientific conception of mankind as
characterized by their time-binding capacity and
function. This conception radically alters our whole
view of human life, human society, and the world.
</p>

<p>
It must be obvious to any one that time-binding
is the only natural criterion and standard for the
time-binding class of life. This mighty term&mdash;time-binding&mdash;when
comprehended, will be found to embrace
the <hi rend="sc">whole</hi> of the natural laws, the natural
ethics, the natural philosophy, the natural sociology,
the natural economics, the natural governance, to be
brought into the education of time-binders; then
really peaceful and progressive civilization, without
periodical collapses and violent readjustments, will
commence; not before. Everything which is really
<q>time-binding</q> <emph>is in</emph> the <hi rend="sc">human dimension</hi>; therefore,
it will represent every quality that is implied
in such words as&mdash;<emph>good</emph>, <emph>just</emph>,
<emph>right</emph>, <emph>beautiful</emph>; while
everything that is merely space-binding will be classified
as <q>animal</q> and be thus assessed at its proper
value. Those ignorant <q>masters of our destinies</q>
who regard humans as animals or as monstrous
hybrids of natural and supernatural must be dethroned
by scientific education.
</p>

<pb n="071"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>

<p>
Humans can be literally poisoned by false ideas
and false teachings. Many people have a just horror
at the thought of putting poison into tea or coffee,
but seem unable to realize that, when they teach false
ideas and false doctrines, they are poisoning the
time-binding capacity of their fellow men and women.
One has to stop and think! There is nothing mystical
about the fact that ideas and words are energies
which powerfully affect the physico-chemical base of
our time-binding activities. Humans are thus made
untrue to <q>human nature.</q> Hypnotism is a known
fact. It has been proved that a man can be so
hypnotized that in a certain time which has been
suggested to him, he will murder or commit arson
or theft; that, under hypnotic influence, the personal
morale of the individual has only a small influence
upon his conduct; the subject obeys the hypnotic suggestions,
no matter how immoral they are. The
conception of man as a mixture of animal and supernatural
has for ages kept human beings under the
deadly spell of the suggestion that, animal selfishness
and animal greediness are their essential character,
and the spell has operated to suppress their
<hi rend="sc">real human nature</hi> and to prevent it from expressing
itself naturally and freely.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, when human beings are educated
to a lively realization that they are by <emph>nature</emph>
time-binding creatures, then they will spontaneously
<pb n="072"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>
live in accordance with their time-binding nature,
which, as I have said, is the source and support of
the highest ideals.
</p>

<p>
What is achieved in blaming a man for being selfish
and greedy if he acts under the influence of a
social environment and education which teach him
that he is an animal and that selfishness and greediness
are of the essence of his nature?
</p>

<p>
Even so eminent a philosopher and psychologist as
Spencer tells us: <q>Of self-evident truths so dealt
with, the one which here concerns us is that a creature
must live before it can act ... Ethics has to
recognize the truth that egoism comes before altruism.</q>
This is true for <hi rend="sc">animals</hi>, because animals
die out from lack of food when their natural supply
of it is insufficient because they have <hi rend="sc">not the
capacity to produce artificially</hi>. But it is not
true for the <hi rend="sc">human dimension</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Why not? Because humans through their time-binding
capacity are first of all <emph>creators</emph> and so their
number is not controlled by the supply of unaided
nature, but only by men's artificial productivity,
which is <hi rend="sc">the materialization of their time-binding
capacity</hi>
</p>

<p>
Man, therefore, by the very intrinsic character of
his being, <hi rend="sc">must act first, in order to be able
to live</hi> (through the action of parents&mdash;or society)
which is not the case with animals. The misunderstanding
<pb n="073"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>
of this simple truth is largely accountable
for the evil of our ethical and economic systems or
lack of systems. As a matter of fact, if humanity
were to live in <emph>complete</emph> accord with the animal conception
of man, artificial production&mdash;time-binding
production&mdash;would cease and ninety per cent of
mankind would perish by starvation. It is just
because human beings are not animals but are time-binders&mdash;not
mere finders but creators of food and
shelter&mdash;that they are able to live in such vast
numbers.
</p>

<p>
Here even the blind must see the effect of higher
dimensionality, and this effect becomes in turn the
cause of other effects which produce still others, and
so on in an endless chain. <hi rend="sc">we live because we
produce, because we are acting in time and
are not merely acting in space&mdash;because man
is not a kind of animal</hi>. It is all so simple, if
only we apply a little sound logic in our thinking
about human nature and human affairs. If human
ethics are to be human, are to be in the human
dimension, the postulates of ethics must be changed;
<hi rend="sc">for humanity in order to live must act first</hi>;
the laws of ethics&mdash;the laws of right living&mdash;are
<emph>natural</emph> laws&mdash;laws of human nature&mdash;laws having
their whole source and sanction in the time-binding
capacity and time-binding activity peculiar to man.
Human excellence is excellence in time-binding, and
<pb n="074"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>
must be measured and rewarded by time-binding
standards of worth.
</p>

<p>
Humanity, in order to live, must produce creatively
and therefore must be guided by applied
science, by technology; and this means that the so-called
social sciences of ethics, jurisprudence, psychology,
economics, sociology, politics, and government
must be emancipated from medieval metaphysics;
they must be made scientific; they must be
<emph>technologized</emph>; they must be made to progress and
to function in the proper dimension&mdash;the human
dimension and not that of animals: they must be
made time-binding sciences.
</p>

<p>
Can this be done? I have no doubt that it can.
For what is human life after all?
</p>

<p>
To a general in the battlefield, human life is a
factor which, if properly used, can destroy the
enemy. To an engineer human life is an equivalent
to energy, or a capacity to do work, mental or muscular,
and the moment something is found to be a
source of energy and to have the capacity of doing
work, the first thing to do, from the engineer's point
of view, is to analyse the generator with a view to
discovering how best to conserve it, to improve it,
and bring it to the level of maximum productivity.
Human beings are very complicated energy-producing
batteries differing widely in quality and magnitude
of productive power. Experience has shown
<pb n="075"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>
that these batteries are, first of all, chemical batteries
producing a mysterious energy. If these batteries
are not supplied periodically with a more or
less constant quantity of some chemical elements
called food and air, the batteries will cease to function&mdash;they
will die. In the examination of the structure
of these batteries we find that the chemical base
is very much accentuated all through the structure.
This chemical generator is divided into branches
each of which has a very different rôle which it
must perform in harmony with all the others. The
mechanical parts of the structure are built in conformity
to the rules of mechanics and are automatically
furnished with lubrication and with chemical
supplies for automatically renewing worn-out parts.
The chemical processes not only deposit particles of
mass for the structure of the generator but produce
some very powerful unknown kinds of energies or
vibrations which make all the chemical parts function;
we find also a mysterious apparatus with a complex
of wires which we call brain glands, and nerves;
and, finally, these human batteries have the remarkable
capacity of reproduction.
</p>

<p>
These functions are familiar to everybody. From
the knowledge of other physical, mechanical and
chemical phenomena of nature, we must come to the
conclusion, that this human battery is the most perfect
example of a complex engine; it has all the
<pb n="076"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>
peculiarities of a chemical battery combined with a
generator of a peculiar energy called life; above all,
it has mental or spiritual capacities; it is thus
equipped with both mental and mechanical means for
producing work. The parts and functions of this
marvelous engine have been the subject of a vast
amount of research in various special branches of
science. A very noteworthy fact is that both the
physical work and the mental work of this human
engine are always accompanied by both physical and
chemical changes in the structure of its machinery&mdash;corresponding
to the wear and tear of non-living
engines. It also presents certain sexual and spiritual
phenomena that have a striking likeness to certain
phenomena, especially wireless phenomena, to electricity
and to radium. This human engine-battery
is of unusual strength, durability and perfection; and
yet it is very liable to damage and even wreckage, if
not properly used. The controlling factors are very
delicate and so the engine is very capricious. Very
special training and understanding are necessary for
its control.
</p>

<p>
The reader may wish to ask: What is the essence
of the time-binding power of Man? Talk of essences
is metaphysical&mdash;it is not scientific. Let me
explain by an example.
</p>

<p>
What is electricity? The scientific answer is: electricity
is that which exhibits such and such phenomena.
<pb n="077"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>
Electricity means nothing but a certain
group of phenomena called electric. We are studying
electricity when we are studying those phenomena.
Thus it is in physics&mdash;there is no talk of
essences. So, too, in Human Engineering&mdash;we
shall not talk of the <emph>essence</emph> of time-binding but only
of the phenomena and the laws thereof. What has
led to the development of electric appliances is
knowledge of electrical phenomena&mdash;not metaphysical
talk about the electrical essence. And what
will lead to the science and art of Human Engineering
is knowledge of time-binding phenomena&mdash;not
vain babble about an essence of time-binding power.
There is no mystery about the word time-binding.
Some descriptive term was necessary to indicate that
human capacity which discriminates human beings
from animals and marks man as man. For that use&mdash;the
appropriateness of the term time-binding
becomes more and more manifest upon reflection.
</p>

<p>
What are the conditions of life upon this earth?
Is there war or peace in daily life? All living beings
require food; they multiply in a geometrical ratio;
and so the <emph>natural</emph> productivity of the soil becomes
increasingly inadequate. The tendency to increase
in geometrical ratio is true of all life&mdash;vegetable,
animal and human, but the tendency is checked by
various counteracting influences, natural and artificial.
A short time ago these checks had so operated
<pb n="078"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>
to annul the law of increase as almost to stop the
growth of human population. It is only by the time-binding
capacity of man&mdash;by scientific progress and
technological invention&mdash;that the checks have been
overcome. And so in the last century the population
of Europe increased more than it had increased
in several centuries before. Impoverished soil, excessive
heat or cold, excessive moisture, the lack of rain-fall,
and many other factors are hostile to life. It
is evident, therefore, that human life must especially
struggle for existence; it must carry on a perpetual
contest for self preservation. It seems obvious that,
if there is perpetual war in every-day life, war
methods must be applied.
</p>

<p>
We have just passed through a tremendous world-wide
<emph>military</emph> war and we developed special ways of
producing power to overcome the enemy. We were
thus driven to discover some of the hidden sources
of power and all of our old habits and ideas were
bent toward military methods and military technology.
The war of every-day life against hostile
elements is war for the subjugation of physical
nature and not for the conquest of people. It is a
war carried on by the time-binding power of men
pitted against natural obstacles, and its progressive
triumph means progressive advancement in human
weal.
</p>

<p>
The lesson of the World War should not be
<pb n="079"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>
missed through failure to analyse it. When nations
war with nations, the normal daily war of millions
and millions of individuals to subjugate natural resources
to human uses is interrupted, and the slow-gathered
fruits of measureless toil are destroyed.
</p>

<p>
But peaceful war, war for the conquest of nature,
involves the use of methods of technology and, what
is even more important, technological philosophy,
law and ethics.
</p>

<p>
What I want to emphasize in this little book, is
the need of a thoroughgoing revision of our ideas;
and the revision must be made by engineering minds
in order that our ideas may be made to match facts.
If we are ill, we consult a physician or a surgeon,
not a charlatan. We must learn that, when there is
trouble with the producing power of the world, we
have to consult an engineer, an expert on power.
Politicians, diplomats, and lawyers do not understand
the problem. What I am advocating is that we
must learn to ask those who know how to produce
things, instead of asking those whose profession is
to fight for the division of things produced by nature
or by other human beings.
</p>

<p>
As a matter of fact our civilization has been for
a long time disorganized to the point of disease.
Lately through the whirl of changing conditions, due
to the great release of power in the new-born giant
technology, the disorganization has become acute.
<pb n="080"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>
The sick seldom know the cure for themselves. If
the cure is to be enduring, we have to go to the
source, and this can be done only by men familiar,
not only with effects but also with the causes.
</p>

<p>
Money is not the wealth of a nation, but production
is wealth; so <emph>ordered production</emph> is the main
object for humanity. But to have the maximum of
production, it is necessary to have production put
on a sound basis. No mere preaching of brotherly
love, or class hatred, will produce one single brick
for the building of the future temple of human victory&mdash;the
temple of <emph>human</emph> civilization. Ordered
production demands analysis of basic facts.
</p>

<p>
This era is essentially an industrial era. To produce
we have to have: (1) raw material or soil; (2)
instruments for production&mdash;tools and machines;
and (3) the application of power.
</p>

<p>
The three requirements may be briefly characterized
and appraised as follows:
</p>

<p>
(1) Raw material and soil are products of nature;
humanity simply took them and had the use
of them for nothing, because it is impossible to call
a prayer of thanksgiving (if any) addressed to a
<q>creator</q> as payment to gods or men. But raw
material and soil, in the conditions in which nature
produces them, are of very little immediate benefit
to humanity, because unfilled soil produces very
little food for humans, and raw material such as
<pb n="081"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>
wood, coal, oil, iron, copper, etc., are completely
useless to humanity until after human work is applied
to them. It is necessary to cut a tree for the
making of timber; it is necessary to excavate the
minerals, and even then, only by applying further
human work is it possible to make them available
for any human use. So, it is obvious that even raw
materials in the form in which nature has produced
them, are mostly of no value and unavailable for
use, unless reproduced through the process of
<q>human creative production.</q> Therefore, we may
well conclude that <q>raw material</q> must be divided
into two very distinct classes: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) raw material as
produced by nature&mdash;nature's free gift&mdash;which in
its original form and place has practically no use-value;
and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) raw material reproduced by man's
mental and muscular activities, by his <q>time-binding</q>
capacities. Raw materials of the second class have
an enormous use-value; indeed they make the existence
of humanity possible.
</p>

<p>
As to the second requirement for production,
namely:
</p>

<p>
(2) Tools and machines, it is obvious that
<q>tools and machines</q> are made of raw material by
human work, mental and muscular.
</p>

<p>
And, finally:
</p>

<p>
(3) The application of power. Different sources
of natural energy and power are known. The most
<pb n="082"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>
important available source of energy for this globe
is the sun&mdash;the heat of the sun. This solar heat is
the origin of water power, of wind power, and of
the power bound up in coal, of the chemistry, growth
and transforming agency of plants.<note place="foot"><p>It must
be remembered here that our world is, first of all, a
dynamic conglomeration of matter and energy, which to-day, as
well as in the first period of primitive organic life, took and takes
different known and unknown forms. One of these forms of
energy is the chemical energy, with its tendency to combinations
and exchanges. Different elements act in different ways. The
history of the earth and its life is simply the history of different
chemical periods, with different transformations of energy. A
strange fact is to be noticed about nitrogen. Nitrogen chemically
has an exceptional inertness toward most other substances,
but once it is a component part of a substance, almost all of these
combinations are a very powerful source of energy, and all of
them have a very strong effect upon organic life. Nitric acid
acts through oxidation, the substances are burned up by the
oxygen given off from the acid. Nitric acid occurs in nature,
in a combination called nitrates. From the soil the nitrates
pass into the plant. Nitrite of amyl acts upon our organs in a
most violent and spasmodic way. Nitrous oxide is the so-called
laughing gas.</p>
<p>Alkaloids are compounds of a vegetable origin, generally of
complex composition and capable of producing marked effects
upon animals. They all contain nitrogen. Explosives which
are a chemical means of storing tremendous amounts of energy,
are mostly of some nitrogenous compound. Albumen is an
organic compound of great importance in life, which, besides
being the characteristic ingredient in the white of an egg, abounds
in the serum of the blood and forms an important part of the
muscles and brain. Albuminoids play the most vital rôle in
plant life and are an extensive class of organic bodies found in
plants and animals, as they are found to form the chief constituents
of blood, nerves. All albuminoids found in animals are
produced by the processes fulfilled in plants. Their exact
constitution is not known; analysis shows that they contain
approximately: Carbon 50-55%, Hydrogen 6.9-7.5%, Nitrogen
15-19%, Oxygen 20-24%, Sulphur 0.3-2.0%. Venous blood
contains in 100 volumes: Nitrogen, 13; Carbonic Acid, 71.6;
Oxygen, 15.3. Arterial blood: Nitrogen, 14.5; Carbonic Acid,
62.3; Oxygen, 23.2.</p>
<p><q>Nitrogenous compounds in general, are extremely prone to
decomposition; their decomposition often involving a sudden
and great evolution of force. We see that substances classed
as ferments ... are all nitrogenous ... and we see that
even in organisms and parts of organisms where the activities
are least, such changes as do take place are initiated by a substance
containing nitrogen.... We see that organic matter is
so constituted that small incidental actions are capable of
initiating great reaction and liberating large quantities of power.... The
seed of a plant contains nitrogenous substances in a
far higher ratio than the rest of the plant; and the seed differs
from the rest of the plant in its ability to initiate ... extensive
vital changes&mdash;the changes constituting germination. Similarly
in the bodies of animals ... in every living vegetal cell
there is a certain part that contains nitrogen. This part initiates
these changes which constitute the development of the cell.... It
is a curious and significant fact that, in technology, we not
only utilize the same principle of initiating extensive changes
among comparatively stable compounds by the help of compounds
much less stable, but we employ for the purpose compounds
of the same general class. Our modern method of
firing a gun is to place in close proximity with the gunpowder
which we choose to decompose or explode, a small portion of
fulminating powder, which is decomposed or exploded with
extreme facility, and which on decomposing, communicates
the consequent molecular disturbances to the less easily decomposed
gunpowder. When we ask what this fulminating powder
is composed of, we find that it is a nitrogenous salt.</q>&mdash;Spencer.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n="083"/><anchor id="Pg083"/>

<p>
All foods which the animals as well as the humans
use are, already, the result of the solar energy transformed
into what may be called chemical energy.
Transformation of energies is building up of life.
</p>

<p>
It is to be clearly seen that the only source of
energy which can be directly appropriated and used
by man or animal is vegetable food found in the
wilderness; no other sources of power are available
<pb n="084"/><anchor id="Pg084"/>
for <emph>direct</emph> use; they have first to be mastered
and directed by human brain. The same is true in
regard to the getting of animal food, the creation
of a water- or windmill, or a steam engine, or the
art of using a team of horses, or a bushel of wheat;
these are not available except by the use of the human
<q>time-binding</q> power.
</p>

<p>
This short survey of facts, known to everybody,
brings us to the conclusion that all problems of production
come ultimately to the analysis of
</p>

<p>
(1) Natural resources of raw material and natural
energy, freely supplied by nature, which, as we
have seen, in the form as produced by nature alone,
have very little or no value for humanity;
</p>

<p>
(2) The activity of the human brain (because
human muscles are always directed by the brain)
which gives value to the otherwise useless raw materials
and energies.
</p>

<p>
Hence, to understand the processes of production,
it is essential to realize that humanity is able to survive
only by virtue of the capacity of humans to exploit
natural resources&mdash;to convert the products of
nature into forms available for human needs. If
humanity had only the capacity of apes, depending
exclusively on wild fruits and the like, they would be
confined to those comparatively small regions of the
globe where the climate and the fertility of the soil
are specially favorable. But in the case supposed,
<pb n="085"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>
humans would not be humans, they would not be
time-binders&mdash;they would be animals&mdash;mere space-binders.
</p>

<p>
There are other facts which must be kept constantly
in mind. One of them is that, in the world
in which we live, there are natural laws of inorganic
as well as organic phenomena. Another of the facts
is, as before said, that the human class of life has the
peculiar capacity of establishing the social laws and
customs which regulate and influence its destinies,
which help or hinder the processes of production
upon which the lives and happiness of mankind
essentially and fundamentally depend.
</p>

<p>
It must not be lost sight of in this connection that
the human class of life is a part and a product of
nature, and that, therefore, there must be <emph>fundamental
laws which are natural for this class of life</emph>.
A stone obeys the natural laws of stones; a liquid
conforms to the natural law of liquids; a plant, to
the natural laws of plants; an animal, to the natural
laws of animals; it follows inevitably that there <emph>must</emph>
be natural laws for humans.
</p>

<p>
But here the problem becomes more complicated;
for the stone, the plant and the animal do not possess
the intellectual power to create and initiate and so
must blindly obey the laws that are natural for them;
they are not free to determine their own destinies.
Not so with man; man has the capacity and he
<pb n="086"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>
can, through ignorance or neglect or mal-intent,
deviate from, or misinterpret, the natural laws for
the human class of life. Just therein lies the secret
and the source of human chaos and woe&mdash;a fact of
such tremendous importance that it cannot be over-emphasized
and it seems impossible to evade it
longer. To discover the nature of Man and the
laws of that <emph>nature</emph>, marks the summit of human
enterprises. For to solve this <emph>problem is to open the
way to everything which can be of importance to
humanity</emph>&mdash;to human welfare and happiness.
</p>

<p>
The great problem has been felt as a powerful
impulse throughout the ages of human striving, for
in all times it has been evident to thinkers that upon
the right solution of the problem must forever depend
the welfare of mankind. Many <q>solutions</q>
have been offered; and, though they have differed
widely, they agree in one respect&mdash;they have had a
common fate&mdash;the fate of being false. What has
been the trouble? The trouble has been, in every
instance, a radical misconception of what a human
being really is. The problem is to discover the natural
laws of the human class of life. All the <q>solutions</q>
offered in the course of history and those
which are current to-day are of two and only two
kinds&mdash;<emph>zoological</emph> and <emph>mythological</emph>. The zoological
solutions are those which grow out of the false
conception according to which human beings are animals;
<pb n="087"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>
if humans are animals, the laws of human
nature are the laws of animal nature; and so the
social <q>sciences</q> of ethics, law, politics, economics,
government become nothing but branches of
zoology; as sciences, they are the studies of animal
life; as arts, they are the arts of managing and controlling
animals; according to this zoological philosophy,
human wisdom about human beings is animal
wisdom about animals.
</p>

<p>
The mythological <q>solutions</q> are those which
start with the monstrous conception according to
which human beings have no proper place in nature
but are mixtures of natural and <emph>super</emph>natural&mdash;unions
or combinations of animality and divinity.
Such <q>solutions</q> contain no conception of <emph>natural</emph>
law; scientifically judged, they are mythological
absurdities&mdash;muddle-headed chattering of crude and
irresponsible metaphysics&mdash;well-meaning no doubt,
but silly, and deadly in their effects upon the interests
of mankind, vitiating ethics, law, economics, politics
and government.
</p>

<p>
Such have been and still are the regnant philosophies
of human nature. What is the remedy? How
are the laws of human nature to be discovered?
</p>

<p>
It is evident that the enterprise, like all other
scientific enterprises, must be based upon and guided
by realities. It is essential to realize that the great,
central, dominant, all-embracing reality is the reality
<pb n="088"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>
of <emph>human nature</emph>. If we misconceive this fundamental
matter, the enterprise must fail; that is both
logically clear and clear in the sad light of history;
but if we conceive it aright, we may confidently expect
the enterprise to prosper. That is why, in the chapter
on <q>The Classes of Life,</q> I have laid so much
stress on the absolute necessity of conceiving Man
as being what he really is, and not something else.
And we have discovered what man is: we have discovered
that man is characterized by the capacity
or power to bind time, and so we have <emph>defined</emph>
humanity as the time-binding class of life. That concept
is fundamental. It contains the germ of the
science and art of Human Engineering. The problem
of discovering and applying the <q>laws of human
nature</q> is the problem of discovering and applying
to the conduct of life the laws of time-binding&mdash;of
time-binding activity&mdash;of time-binding <emph>energy</emph>. This
fact must be firmly seized and kept steadily in mind.
</p>

<p>
Energy, we have noted, is the capacity to do work.
In human economy work may be (1) <emph>useful</emph> or (2)
<emph>neutral</emph> or (3) <emph>harmful</emph>. These words have no significance
except in human economy. The energy of
the human intellect is a time-binding energy, for it
is able to direct, to use, to transform other energies.
This time-binding energy is of higher rank&mdash;of
higher dimensionality&mdash;than the other natural
energies which it directs, controls, uses, and transforms.
<pb n="089"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>
This higher energy&mdash;which is commonly
called the mental or spiritual power of man&mdash;<emph>is</emph> time-binding
because it makes past achievements live in
the present and present activities in time-to-come. It
is an energy that initiates; it is an energy that creates;
it is an energy that can understand the past and
foretell the future&mdash;it is both historian and prophet;
it is an energy that loads <emph>abstract</emph> time&mdash;the vehicle
of events&mdash;with an ever-increasing burden of intellectual
achievements, of spiritual wealth, destined for
the civilization of posterity. And what is the natural
law of the increase? What is the natural law of
human advancements in all great matters of human
concern?
</p>

<p>
The question is of utmost importance both theoretically
and practically, for the law&mdash;whatever it be&mdash;is
a <emph>natural</emph> law&mdash;a law of human nature&mdash;a law
of the time-binding energy of man. What <emph>is</emph> the
law? We have already noted the law of arithmetical
progression and the law of geometric progression;
we have seen the immense difference between
them; and we have seen that the natural law of
human progress in each and every cardinal matter
is a law like that of a rapidly increasing geometric
progression. In other words, the natural law of
human progress&mdash;the natural law of amelioration in
human affairs&mdash;the fundamental law of human
nature&mdash;the basic law of the time-binding energy
<pb n="090"/><anchor id="Pg090"/>
peculiar to man&mdash;is a Logarithmic law&mdash;a law of
logarithmic increase. I beg the reader not to let
the term bewilder him but to make it his own. It is
easy to understand; and its significance is mighty and
everlasting. Even its mathematical formulation can
be understood by boys and girls. Let us see how the
formulation looks.
</p>

<p>
Suppose <hi rend='italic'>PR</hi> to denote the amount of progress
made in some important field by a given generation&mdash;which
we may call the <q>first</q> generation;
where <hi rend='italic'>R</hi> denotes the common ratio&mdash;the ratio of
improvement&mdash;that is, the number by which the
progress of one generation must be multiplied to
give the amount of progress made by the next generation;
then the amount of progress made by the
second generation will be
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi>; that made by the
third generation will be
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi></hi>; and so on; now denote
by <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> the number of generations, counting the first
one and all that follow in endless succession. Then
the following series will show the law of human
progress in the chosen field:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>PR,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi>,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">4</hi>,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">5</hi>, ...,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi>,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T+1</hi>, ...</hi>;
</p>

<p>
notice how it goes; the first generation ends with PR;
the second generation starts with <hi rend='italic'>PR</hi>, adds
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi>, and
ends with <hi rend='italic'>PR + PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi>;
the third generation starts
with <hi rend='italic'>PR + PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi>,
adds <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi></hi>
and ends with <hi rend='italic'>PR + PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>
+ PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi></hi>;
and so on and on; the <hi rend='italic'>gain</hi> made in
<pb n="091"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>
the <hi rend='italic'>T<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi></hi> generation is
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>the total gain</hi> made in
<hi rend='italic'>T</hi> generations is
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>PR + PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>
+ PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi> + ...
+ PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>;
</p>

<p>
this total gain is given by the formula,
</p>

<p>
Total gain in T generations = (R ÷ R-1) (PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi>-P).
</p>

<p>
If we take <hi rend='italic'>R</hi> to be 2 (which is a very small ratio,
requiring the progress of each generation to be
merely double that of the preceding one) and if we
take <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> to be (say) 10, then we see that the progress
made by the single 10th generation is <hi rend='italic'>P</hi> ×
2<hi rend="vertical-align: super">10</hi>, which
is 1024 times the progress made in the <q>first</q>
generation; and we readily compute that the total
gain in 10 generations is 2046 times the progress
made in the <q>first</q> generation. Moreover, to gain
a just sense of the impressiveness of this law, the
reader must reflect upon the fact that it operates,
not merely on one field, but in all fields of human
interest. <q>Operates in all fields</q> I have just now
said; as a matter of fact, as before pointed out, it does
not so operate <emph>now</emph> in <emph>all</emph> fields nor has it ever done
so. My point is that it <emph>will</emph> so operate when we
once acquire sense enough to let it do so. That
sense we shall have when and only when we discover
that by nature we are time-binders and that
the <emph>effectiveness</emph> of our time-binding capacity is not
<pb n="092"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>
only a function of time but is, as I have explained,
a logarithmic or exponential function of time&mdash;a
function in which time (<hi rend='italic'>T</hi>)
enters as an <emph>exponent</emph>,
as in the expression <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>,
so that we humans are,
unlike animals, naturally qualified not only to
progress, but to progress more and more rapidly, with
an always <emph>accelerating acceleration</emph>, as the generations
pass.
</p>

<p>
This great fact is to be at once the basis, the
regulator and guide in the science and art of Human
Engineering. Whatever squares with that law of
time-binding human energy, is right and makes for
human weal; whatever contravenes it, is wrong and
makes for human woe.
</p>

<p>
And so I repeat that the world will have uninterrupted,
peaceful progress when and only when the
so-called social <q>sciences</q>&mdash;the life-regulating <q>sciences</q>
of ethics, law, philosophy, economics, religion,
politics, and government&mdash;are technologized; when
and only when they are made genuinely scientific in
spirit and method; for then and only then will they
advance, like the natural, mathematical and technological
sciences, in conformity to the fundamental
exponential law of the time-binding nature of man;
then and then only, by the equal pace of progress in
all cardinal matters, the equilibrium of social institutions
will remain stable and social cataclysms cease.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="093"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter V. Wealth"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter V. Wealth"/>
<head>Chapter V. Wealth</head>

<p>
I beg the reader to allow me to begin this chapter
with a word of warning. The reader is aware
that Criticism&mdash;by which I mean Thought&mdash;may be
any one of three kinds: it may be purely destructive;
it may be purely constructive; or it may be both
destructive and constructive at the same time.
Purely destructive criticism is sometimes highly useful.
If an old idea or a system of old ideas be false
and therefore harmful, it is a genuine service to
attack it and destroy it even if nothing be offered
to take its place, just as it is good to destroy a rattlesnake
lurking by a human pathway, even if one does
not offer a substitute for the snake. But, however
useful destructive criticism may be, it is not an easy
service to render; for old ideas, however false and
harmful, are protected alike by habit and by the
inborn conservatism of many minds. Now, habit
indeed is exceedingly useful&mdash;even indispensable to
the effective conduct of life&mdash;for it enables us to do
many useful things automatically and therefore
easily, without conscious thinking, and thus to save
our mental energy for other work; but for the same
<pb n="094"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>
reason, habit is often very harmful; it makes us protect
false ideas automatically, and so when the destructive
critic endeavors to destroy such ideas by
reasoning with us, he finds that he is trying to reason
with automats&mdash;with machines. Such is the chief
difficulty encountered by destructive criticism. On
the other hand, purely constructive criticism&mdash;purely
constructive thought&mdash;consists in introducing new
ideas of a kind that do not clash, or do not seem to
clash, with old ones. Is such criticism or thought
easy? Far from it. It has difficulties of its own.
These are of two varieties: the difficulty of showing
people who are content with their present stock of
old ideas that the new ones are interesting or important;
and the great difficulty of making <emph>new</emph> ideas
clear and intelligible, for the art of being clear and
perfectly intelligible is very, very hard to acquire and
to practise. The third kind of criticism&mdash;the third
kind of thought&mdash;the kind that is at once both destructive
and constructive&mdash;has a double aim&mdash;that
of destroying old ideas that are false and that of
replacing them with new ideas that are true; and so
the third kind of criticism or thought is the most difficult
of all, for it has to overcome both the difficulty
of destructive criticism and that of constructive
thought.
</p>

<p>
The reader, therefore, if he will be good enough
to reflect a little upon the matter, can not fail to appreciate
<pb n="095"/><anchor id="Pg095"/>
the tremendous difficulties which beset the
writing of this little book, for he must perceive, not
only that the work belongs to the third kind of
critical thought, but&mdash;what is much more&mdash;the errors
it aims to destroy are fundamental, world-wide and
old, while the true ideas it seeks to substitute for
them are fundamental and new. This great difficulty,
felt at <emph>every</emph> stage of this writing, is, for a
reason to be presently explained, greatly enhanced
and felt with especial keenness in the present chapter.
I therefore beg the reader to give me here
very special cooperation&mdash;the cooperation of open-mindedness,
candor and critical attention. It is essential
to keep in mind the nature of our enterprise as a
whole, which is that of pointing the way to the science
and art of Human Engineering and laying the foundations
thereof; we have seen Human Engineering,
when developed, is to be the science and art of so directing
human energies and capacities as to make
them contribute most effectively to the advancement
of human welfare; we have seen that this science and
art must have its basis in a true conception of human
nature&mdash;a just conception of what Man really is and
of his natural place in the complex of the world;
we have seen that the ages-old and still current conceptions
of man&mdash;zoological and mythological conceptions,
according to which human beings are either
animals or else hybrids of animals and gods&mdash;are
<pb n="096"/><anchor id="Pg096"/>
mainly responsible for the dismal things in human
history; we have seen that man, far from being an
animal or a compound of natural and supernatural,
is a perfectly natural being characterized by a certain
capacity or power&mdash;the capacity or power to bind
time; we have seen that humanity is, therefore, to be
rightly conceived and scientifically defined as the
time-binding class of life; we have seen that, therefore,
the laws of time-binding energies and time-binding
phenomena are the laws of human nature;
we have seen that this conception of man&mdash;which
must be the basic concept, the fundamental principle
and the perpetual guide and regulator of Human
Engineering&mdash;is bound to work a profound transformation
in all our views on human affairs and, in particular,
must radically alter the so-called social
<q>sciences</q>&mdash;the life-regulating <q>sciences</q> of ethics,
sociology, economics, politics and government&mdash;advancing
them from their present estate of pseudo sciences
to the level of genuine sciences and technologizing
them for the effective service of mankind.
I call them <q>life-regulating,</q> not because they play
a more important part in human affairs than do the
genuine sciences of mathematics, physics, chemistry,
astronomy and biology, for they are not more important
than these, but because they are, so to say,
closer, more immediate and more obvious in their
influence and effects. These life-regulating sciences
<pb n="097"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>
are, of course, not independent; they depend ultimately
upon the genuine sciences for much of their
power and ought to go to them for light and guidance;
but what I mean here by saying they are not
independent is that they are dependent upon each
other, interpenetrating and interlocking in innumerable
ways. To show <emph>in detail</emph> how the so-called
sciences will have to be transformed to make them
accord with the right conception of man and qualify
them for their proper business will eventually require
a large volume or indeed volumes.
</p>

<p>
In this introductory work I cannot deal fully with
one of those <q>sciences</q> nor in suitable outline with
each of them separately. I must be content here to
deal, very briefly, with one of them by way of illustration
and suggestion. Which one shall it be?
</p>

<p>
Now among these life-regulating <q>sciences</q> there
is one specially marked by the importance of its subject,
by its central relation to the others and by its
prominence in the public mind. I mean Economics&mdash;the
<q>dismal science</q> of Political Economy. For that
reason I have chosen to deal with economics. In the
present chapter I shall discuss three of its principal
terms&mdash;Wealth, Capital and Money&mdash;with a view
to showing that the current meanings and interpretations
of these familiar terms must be very greatly
deepened, enlarged and elevated if they are to accord
with facts and laws of human nature and if the so-called
<pb n="098"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>
<q>science</q> which employs them is to become
a genuine science properly qualified to be a branch
of Human Engineering. It is to be shown that the
meanings currently attached by political economists
and others to the terms in question belong to what
I have called the period of humanity's childhood;
and it is to be shown that the new meanings which
the terms must receive belong to the period of
humanity's manhood. It will be seen that the new
meanings differ so radically from the old ones as
to make it desirable for the sake of clarity to give
the new meanings new names. But this, however
scientifically desirable, is impracticable because the
old terms&mdash;wealth, capital, money&mdash;are so deeply
imbedded in the speech of the world. And here
comes into view the very special difficulty alluded to
above and which led me to request the reader's
special cooperation in this chapter. The difficulty
is not merely that of destroying old ideas that are
false; it is not merely that of replacing them with
true ideas that are new; it is that of causing people
habitually to associate meanings that are new and
true with terms associated so long, so universally, so
uniformly with meanings that are false.
</p>

<p>
The secret of philosophy, said Leibnitz, is to treat
familiar things as unfamiliar. By the secret of
<q>philosophy</q> Leibnitz meant the secret of what we
call science. Let us apply this wholesome maxim in
<pb n="099"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>
our present study; let us, in so far as we can, regard
the familiar terms&mdash;wealth, capital and money&mdash;as
unfamiliar; let us deal with them afresh; let us
examine openmindedly the facts&mdash;the phenomena&mdash;to
which the terms relate and ascertain scientifically
the significance the terms must have in a genuine
science of human economy. Examine <q>the facts</q> I
say&mdash;examine <q>the phenomena</q>&mdash;for bending facts
to theories is a vital danger, while bending theories
to facts is essential to science and the peaceful progress
of society.
</p>

<p>
Human beings have always had some sense of
values&mdash;some perception or cognition of values. In
order to express or measure values, it was necessary
to introduce units of measure, or units of exchange.
People began to measure values by means of agricultural
and other products, such as cattle, for example.
The Latin word for cattle was
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">pecus</foreign>, and
the word <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">pecunia</foreign>,
which came to signify money,
accounts for the meaning of our familiar word pecuniary.
The earliest units for measuring became unsuited
to the increasing needs of growing trade,
<q>business,</q> or traffic. Finally a unit called money
was adopted in which the base was the value of some
weight of gold. Thus we see that money came to
mean simply the accepted unit for measuring, representing
and expressing values of and in wealth.
</p>

<p>
But what is wealth? I have said that the old
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
conceptions of wealth, capital and money&mdash;the conceptions
that are still current throughout the world&mdash;belong
to the period of humanity's childhood&mdash;they
are childish conceptions. I have said that they
must be replaced by scientific conceptions&mdash;by conceptions
fit for humanity's manhood. The change
that must be made in our conceptions of the great
terms is tremendous. It is necessary to analyse the
current conceptions of wealth, capital, and money&mdash;the
childish conceptions of them&mdash;in order to reveal
their falseness, stupidity and folly. To do this we
must enter the field of Political Economy&mdash;a field
beset with peculiar difficulties and dangers. All the
Furies of private interests are involved. One gains
the impression that there is little or no real desire
to gain a true conception&mdash;a scientific conception&mdash;of
wealth. Everybody seems to prefer an emotional
definition&mdash;a definition that suits his personal love
of wealth or his hatred of it. Many definitions of
wealth, capital and money are to be found in modern
books of political economy&mdash;definitions and books
belonging to humanity's childhood. For the purpose
of this writing they all of them look alike&mdash;they
sufficiently agree&mdash;they are all of them childish.
Mill, for example, tells us that wealth consists of
<q>useful or agreeable things which possess exchangeable
value.</q> Of capital one of the simplest definitions
is this:
</p>

<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Capital is that part of wealth which is devoted to
obtaining further wealth.</q>
(Alfred Marshall, <hi rend='italic'>Economics of
Industry</hi>.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Walker (in his <hi rend='italic'>Money, Trade and Industry</hi>)
defines money as follows:
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Money is that which passes freely from hand to hand
throughout the community in final discharge of debts and
full payment for commodities, being accepted equally without
reference to the character or credit of the person who
offers it, and without the intention of the person who receives
it to consume it, or to enjoy it, or apply it to any other
use than, in turn, to tender it to others in discharge of debts
or full payment for commodities.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Political economy has many different schools of
thought and methods of classification. Its reasonings
are mainly speculative, metaphysical, and legalistic;
its ethics is zoological ethics, based on the
zoological conception of man as an animal. The
elements of natural logic and natural ethics are
absent. The sophisticated ideas about the subject
of political economy, bluntly do not correspond to
facts. Our primitive forefather in the jungle would
have died from hunger, cold, heat, blood poisoning
or the attacks of wild animals, if he had not used
his brain and muscles to take some stone or a piece
of wood to knock down fruit from trees, to kill an
animal, so as to use his hide for clothes and his meat
for food, or to break wood and trees for a shelter
and to make some weapons for defense and hunting.
</p>

<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>In the first stone which he (the savage) flings at the
wild animal he pursues, in the first stick that he seizes to
strike down the fruit which hangs above his reach, we see
the appropriation of one article for the purpose of aiding
in the acquisition of another and thus we discover the origin
of capital.</q> (R. Torrens, <hi rend='italic'>An Essay on the Production of
Wealth</hi>.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Our primitive forefather's first acquaintance with
fire was probably through lightning; he discovered,
probably by chance, the possibility of making fire by
rubbing together two pieces of wood and by striking
together two pieces of stone; he established one of
the first facts in technology; he felt the warm effect
of fire and also the good effect of broiling his food
by finding some roasted animals in a fire. Thus
nature revealed to him one of its great gifts, the
stored-up energy of the sun in vegetation and its
primitive beneficial use. He was already a time-binding
being; evolution had brought him to that
level. Being a product of nature, he was reflecting
those natural laws that belong to his class of life;
he had ceased to be static&mdash;he had become dynamic&mdash;progressiveness
had got into his blood&mdash;he was
above the estate of animals.
</p>

<p>
We also observe that primitive man produced
commodities, acquired experiences, made observations,
and that some of the produced commodities
had a use-value for other people and remained good
for use, even after his death.
</p>

<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>

<p>
The produced commodities were composed of raw
material, freely supplied by nature, combined with
some mental work which gave him the conception of
how to make and to use the object, and some work on
his part which finally shaped the thing; all of this
mental and manual work consumed an amount of
time. It is obvious that all of these elements are
indispensable to produce anything of any value, or of
any use-value. His child not only directly received
some of the use-values produced by him, but was
initiated into all of his experiences and observations.
(As we know, power, as defined in mechanics,
means the ratio of work done to the time used in
doing it.)
</p>

<p>
All those things are time-binding phenomena produced
by the time-binding capacity of man; but man
has <emph>not</emph> known that <emph>this capacity</emph> was his <emph>defining
mark</emph>. We must notice the strange fact that, from
the engineering point of view, humanity, though very
developed in some ways, is childishly undeveloped
in others. Humanity has some conceptions about
dimensions and talks of the world in which we live
as having three dimensions; yet even in its wildest
imagination it can not picture tangibly a <emph>fourth</emph>
dimension; nay, humanity has not learned to grasp
the real meanings of things that are basic or fundamental.
All of our conceptions are relative and
comparative; all of them are based upon matters
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>
which we do not yet understand; for example, we
talk of time, space, electricity, gravity, and so on,
but no one has been able to define them in terms of
the data of sensation; nevertheless&mdash;and it is a fact
of the greatest importance&mdash;we learn how to use
many things which we do not fully understand and
are not yet able to define.
</p>

<p>
In political economy the meagreness of our understanding
is especially remarkable; we have not yet
grasped the obvious fact&mdash;a fact of immeasurable
import for all of the social sciences&mdash;that with little
exception the wealth and capital possessed by a given
generation are not produced by its own toil but are
the inherited fruit of dead men's toil&mdash;a free gift
of the past. We have yet to learn and apply the
lesson that not only our material wealth and capital
but our science and art and learning and wisdom&mdash;all
that goes to constitute our civilization&mdash;were
produced, not by our own labor, but by the time-binding
energies of past generations.
</p>

<p>
Primitive man used natural laws without knowing
them or understanding them, but he was able to cause
nature to express itself, by finding a way to release
nature's stored up energy. Through the work of his
brain and its direction in the use of his muscles, he
found that some of his appliances were not good;
he made better ones, and thus slowly at first, the
progress of humanity went on. I will not enlarge
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>
upon the history of the evolution of civilization
because it is told in many books.
</p>

<p>
In the earliest times the religious, philosophical,
legal and ethical systems had not been invented. The
morale at that time was a natural morale. Humans
knew that they did not create nature. They did not
feel it <q>proper</q> to <q>expropriate the creator</q> and
legalistically appropriate the earth and its treasure
for themselves. They felt, in their unsophisticated
morale, that being called into existence they had a
natural right to exist and to use freely the gifts of
nature in the preservation of their life; and that is
what they did.
</p>

<p>
After the death of a man, some of the objects produced
by him still survived, such as weapons, fishing
or hunting instruments, or the caves adapted for living;
a baby had to be nourished for some years by
its parents or it would have died. Those facts had
important consequences; objects made by someone
for some particular use could be used by someone
else, even after the death of one or more successive
users; again the experiences acquired by one member
of a family or a group of people were taught by
example or precept to others of the same generation
and to the next generation. Such simple facts are the
corner stones of our whole civilization and they are
the direct result of the <hi rend="sc">human capacity of time-binding</hi>.
</p>

<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>

<p>
The world to-day is full of controversy about
wealth, capital, and money, and because humanity,
through its peculiar time-binding power, binds this
element <q>time</q> in an ever larger and larger degree,
the controversy becomes more and more acute.
Civilization as a process is the process of binding
time; progress is made by the fact that each generation
adds to the material and spiritual wealth which
it inherits. Past achievements&mdash;the fruit of bygone
time&mdash;thus live in the present, are augmented in the
present, and transmitted to the future; the process
goes on; time, the essential element, is so involved
that, though it increases arithmetically, its fruit,
civilization, advances geometrically.
</p>

<p>
But there is another peculiarity in wealth and
money: If a wooden or iron <q>inch</q> be allowed to
rot or rust quietly on some shelf, this <q>inch</q> does
not represent anything besides this piece of wood or
iron. But if we take the <hi rend="sc">mental</hi> value of an inch,
this unit of one of the measures of space, and use it,
with other quantities, in the contemplation of the
skies for the solving of an astronomical problem, it
gives a prophetic answer that, in a certain place there
is a star; this star, may be for years looked for in
vain. Was it that the calculation was wrong? No,
for after further search with telescopes of greater
power, the star is found and the calculation thus
verified.
</p>

<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>

<p>
It is obvious that the <q>unit</q>&mdash;inch&mdash;has no value
by itself, but is very precious as a unit for measuring
the phenomenon of length, which it perfectly represents,
and that is why it was introduced.
</p>

<p>
It is exactly the same with money if the term be
rightly understood. Understood aright, money,
being the measure and representative of wealth, is
in the main, the measure and the representative of
dead men's toil; for, rightly understood, wealth is
almost entirely the product of the labor of by-gone
generations. This product, we have seen, involves
the element of time as the chief factor. And so we
discover how money, properly understood, is connected
with time&mdash;the main function of money is to
measure and represent the accumulated products of
the labor of past generations. Hoarded money is
like an iron <q>inch</q> upon a shelf&mdash;a useless lump;
but when used as a measure and representative of
wealth rightly understood, money renders invaluable
service, for it then serves to measure and represent
the living fruit of dead men's toil.
</p>

<p>
For this reason, it is useless to argue who is the
more important, the capitalist who has legal possession
of most of the material fruit of dead men's toil,
or the laborer who has legal possession of but little
of it. In the laborer, we do not now really look
for his physical muscular labor <hi rend="sc">alone</hi>; for this is
replaced by mechanical or animal power as soon as
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>
it can be. What we do need from labor, and what
we will always need, is his <hi rend="sc">brain&mdash;his time-binding
power</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The population of the world may be divided into
different classes; if the classes are not here enumerated
in the customary way, it is because it is necessary
to classify human beings, as nearly as possible
according to their <q>power-value.</q> There is no assertion
that this is an ideal classification, but if someone
is moved to exclaim&mdash;<q>what a foolish, unscientific
division!</q>&mdash;I will answer by saying: <q>I grant that
the division is foolish and unscientific; but <hi rend="sc">it is the
only division which corresponds to
facts in life</hi>, and it is not the writer's fault.
By this <q>foolishness</q> some good may be accomplished.</q>
</p>

<p>
From an engineer's point of view humanity is
apparently to be divided into three classes; (1) the
intellectuals; (2) the rich; and (3) the poor. This
division would seem to be contrary to all the rules
of logic, but it corresponds to facts. Of course some
individuals belong to two of the classes or even to
all three of them, an after-war product, but essentially,
they belong to the one class in proportion
to the characteristic which is the most marked in
their life; that is, in the sense of social classes&mdash;<hi rend="sc">based
on magnitude of values</hi>.
</p>

<p>
(1) The intellectuals are the men and women
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>
who possess the knowledge produced by the labor
of by-gone generations but do not possess the material
wealth thus produced. In mastering and using
this inheritance of knowledge, they are exercising
their time-binding energies and making the labor of
the dead live in the present and for the future.
</p>

<p>
(2) The rich are those who have possession and
control of most of the <emph>material</emph> wealth produced by
the toil of bygone generations&mdash;wealth that is dead
unless animated and transformed by the time-binding
labor of the living.
</p>

<p>
(3) The poor are those who have neither the
knowledge possessed by the intellectuals nor the
material wealth possessed by the rich and who, moreover,
because nearly all their efforts, under present
conditions, are limited to the struggle for mere existence,
have little or no opportunity to exercise their
time-binding capacity.
</p>

<p>
Let us now try to ascertain the rôle of the time-binding
class of life as a whole. We have by
necessity, to go back to the beginning&mdash;back to the
savage. We have seen what were the conditions
of his work and progress; we saw that for each successful
achievement he often had to wrestle with a
very large number of unsuccessful achievements, and
his lifetime being so limited, the total of his successful
achievements was very limited, so that he was
able to give to his child only a few useful objects and
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>
the sum of his experience. Generally speaking, each
successor did not start his life at the point where
his father started; he started somewhere near where
his father left off. His father gave, say, fifty years
to discover two truths in nature and succeeded in
making two or three simple objects; but the son does
not need to give fifty years to discover and create the
same achievements, and so he has time to achieve
something <emph>new</emph>. He thus adds his own achievements
to those of his father in tools and experience; this is
the mathematical equivalent of adding his parent's
years of life to his own. His mother's work and
experience are of course included&mdash;the name father
and son being only used representatively.
</p>

<p>
This stupendous fact is the definitive mark of
humanity&mdash;the power to roll up continuously the
ever-increasing achievements of generation after
generation endlessly. We have seen that this time-binding
power is an exponential power or function
of time. Time flows on, increasing in arithmetical
progression, adding generation unto generation;
but the results of human energies working in time
do not go on arithmetically; they pile up or roll up
more and more rapidly, augmenting in accordance
with the law of a more and more rapidly increasing
geometric progression. The typical term of the
progression is <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>
where <hi rend='italic'>PR</hi> denotes the ending
progress made in the generation with which we
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>
agree to start our reckoning, <hi rend='italic'>R</hi> denotes the ratio
increase, and <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> denotes the number of generations
after the chosen <q>start.</q> The quantity,
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi> of
progress made in the <hi rend='italic'>Tth</hi> generation contains
<hi rend='italic'>T</hi> as
an exponent, and so the quantity, varying as time
<hi rend='italic'>T</hi> passes, is called an exponential function of the
time.
</p>

<p>
Nature is the source of all energy. Plants, the
lowest form of life, have a definite rôle to perform
in the economy of nature. Their function is the
forming of albuminoids and other substances for
higher purposes. All of their nitrates are high-explosives,
or low explosives, but explosives anyway.
They are powerful sources of some new
energy. Animal life uses these <q>explosives</q> as food
and is correspondingly more dynamic, but in animal
life time does not play the rôle it plays in human
life. Animals are limited by death permanently. If
animals make any progress from generation to generation,
it is so small as to be negligible. A beaver,
for example, is a remarkable builder of dams, but
he does not progress in the way of inventions or further
development. A beaver dam is always a beaver
dam.
</p>

<p>
Finally humanity, the highest known class of
life, has time-binding capacity as its characteristic,
its discriminant, its peculiar and definitive mark.
It is an unrealized fact that in this higher class of
<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>
life, <hi rend='italic'>the law of organic growth develops into the law
of energy-growth&mdash;the mind&mdash;the time-binding energy&mdash;an
increasing exponential function of time.</hi> That
fact is of basic importance for the science and art
of Human Engineering. In mechanics we have the
well-known formula
</p>

<p>
(1) Work ÷ Time = Power.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that, in accordance with the law of
geometric progression, <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>
represents the progress
made&mdash;the work done&mdash;in the <hi rend='italic'>Tth</hi> generation
(<hi rend='italic'>T</hi>
being counted from some generation taken as starting
point of reckoning); this progress, achievement,
or <hi rend='italic'>work</hi>, being done in <emph>one</emph> generation, we have by (1)
</p>

<p>
(2) ( Work = PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi> ) / ( Time = 1) = Power,
</p>

<p>
that is, <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>
= Power; this means that the number
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>, which
measures the work done in a given
generation, is also the measure of the power that
does the work. Now, the total work, <hi rend='italic'>W</hi>, done in
the <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> generations is
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>W = PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">1</hi>
+ PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>
+ PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi> + ...
+ PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>;
</p>

<p>
that is,
</p>

<p>
(4) <hi rend='italic'>W</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>R</hi> ÷ (<hi rend='italic'>R</hi>-1)
× (<hi rend='italic'>PR</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi>
- <hi rend='italic'>P</hi>)
</p>

<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>

<p>
It should be noticed that by (2) this expression for
<hi rend='italic'>W</hi> may also be regarded as
the sum of <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> different
powers <hi rend='italic'>PR</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi>, etc.,
each working during one and
only one generation; if we divided this sum by <hi rend='italic'>T</hi>,
the quotient would be a power that would have to
act through <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> generations to produce <hi rend='italic'>W</hi>. The
reader should not fail to notice very carefully that
the expression (4) for <hi rend='italic'>W</hi> is an expression for the
total progress made&mdash;the total work done&mdash;the
total wealth produced&mdash;in the course of <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> generations
and he should especially note how the expression
involves the exponential function of time (<hi rend='italic'>T</hi>),
namely <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>.
</p>

<p>
The formula makes mathematically evident the
time-binding capacity characteristic of the human
class of life. Properly understood, <emph>wealth</emph> consists
of the fruits or products of this time-binding capacity
of man. Animals do not produce wealth; it is
produced by Man and only Man. The foregoing
basic formulation should lead to further similar
developments throwing much light upon the process
of civilization and serving to eliminate "private
opinion" from the conduct of human affairs. (In
this writing it is not important to look deeper into
these proposed series. The fact remains that <hi rend='italic'>P</hi>, as
well as <hi rend='italic'>R</hi>, are peculiarly increasing series of a geometrical
character&mdash;the precise form will be developed
in another writing.)
</p>

<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>

<p>
Human achievements and progress, because cumulative,
are knocking out the barriers of time. This
fact is the vital and dynamic difference between animal
life and human life. As plants gather in and
store up solar energy into sheaves for the use and
growth of animal and man&mdash;so humans are gathering
and binding the knowledge of past centuries into
sheaves for the use and development of generations
yet unborn.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that the term wealth, rightly understood,
means the fruit of the time-binding work of
humanity. Wealth is of two kinds: one is material;
the other is knowledge. Both kinds have use-value.
The first kind perishes&mdash;the commodities composing
it deteriorate and become useless. The other is permanent
in character; it is imperishable; it may be lost
or forgotten but it does not wear out.
</p>

<p>
The one is limited in time; the other, unlimited in
time; the former I call <hi rend="sc">potential use-value</hi>; the
latter, <hi rend="sc">kinetic use-value</hi>. Analysis will justify the
names. The energy of a body which is due to its
position, is called potential energy. The energy of
a body which is due to its motion, is called kinetic
energy. Here the material use-value has value
through its position, shape and so forth; it is immobile
if not used, and has not the capacity to progress.
Mental use-values are not static but permanently
dynamic; one thought, one discovery, is the impulse
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>
to others; they follow the law of an increasing <emph>potential</emph>
function of time. (See <ref target="Appendix_II">app. II</ref>.) This is why
these names correspond to the two names of the two
mentioned classes of energy.
</p>

<p>
Here I must return to the current conceptions of
wealth and capital, before cited. <q>Wealth,</q> we are
told, <q>is any useful or agreeable thing which possesses
<hi rend='italic'>ex</hi>change<hi rend='italic'>able value</hi>.</q>
And we are told that
<q>Capital is that part of wealth which is devoted to
obtaining further wealth.</q> I have said that such
conceptions&mdash;such definitions&mdash;of wealth and capital
are childish&mdash;they belong to the period of humanity's
childhood. That they are indeed childish conceptions
the reader can not fail to see if he will reflect
upon them and especially if he will compare them
with the scientific conception according to which
wealth consists of those things&mdash;whether they be
material commodities or forms of knowledge and
understanding&mdash;that have been produced by the
time-binding energies of humanity, and according to
which <emph>nearly all the wealth of the world at any given
time</emph> is the
<emph>accumulated fruit of the toil of past generations</emph>&mdash;the
living work of the dead. It seems
unnecessary to warn the reader against confusing
the <q><emph>making</emph></q> of money by hook or crook, by trick
or trade, with the <emph>creating</emph> of wealth, by the product
of labor. In calling the old conceptions childish, I
do not mean that they contain no element of truth
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>
whatever; I mean that they are shallow, scientifically
or spiritually meagre, narrow in their vision, wrong
in their accent; I especially mean that they are dumb,
because they are blind, regarding the central matter
that wealth is the natural offspring of Time and
Human Toil. The old conceptions do indeed imply
that wealth and capital involve both potential and
kinetic use-values, and in so far they are right. But
how do such use-values arise?
</p>

<p>
The potential use-values in wealth are created by
human work operating in time upon raw material
given by nature. The use-values are produced by
time-taking transformations of the raw materials;
these transformations are wrought by human brain
labor and human muscular labor directed by the
human brain acting in time. The kinetic use-values
of wealth are also created by human toil&mdash;mainly by
the intellectual labor of observation, experimentation,
imagination, deduction and invention, all consuming
the precious time of short human lives. It
is obvious that in the creation of use-values whether
potential or kinetic, the element of <emph>time</emph> enters as an
absolutely essential factor. The fundamental importance
of time as a factor in the production of
wealth&mdash;the fact that wealth and the use-values of
wealth are literally the natural offspring of the
spiritual union of time with toil&mdash;has been completely
overlooked, not only by the economics, but by the
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>
ethics, the jurisprudence and the other branches of
speculative reasoning, throughout the long period of
humanity's childhood. In the course of the ages there
has indeed been much <q>talk</q> about time, but there
has been no recognition of the basic significance of
time as essential in the conception and in the very
constitution of human values.
</p>

<p>
It is often said that <q>Time is Money</q>; the statement
is often false; but the proposition that Money
is Time is always true. It is always true in the profound
sense that Money is the measure and symbol
of Wealth&mdash;the product of Time and Toil&mdash;the
crystallization of the time-binding human capacity.
<hi rend="sc">it is thus true that money is a very precious
thing, the measure and symbol of work&mdash;in
part the work of the living but, in the main,
the living work of the dead.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Nature's laws are supreme; we cannot change
them; we can deviate from them for a while, but the
end is evil. That is the lesson we must learn from
the history of Humanity's childhood. False conceptions
of Man&mdash;ignorance of the laws of human
nature&mdash;have given us unscientific economies, unscientific
ethics, unscientific law, unscientific politics,
unscientific government. These have made human
history the history of social cataclysms&mdash;insurrections,
wars, revolutions&mdash;sad tokens not so much of
human lust as of human ignorance of the laws of
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>
human nature. There is but one remedy, one hope&mdash;a
science and art of Human Engineering based
upon the just conception of humanity as the time-binding
class of life and conforming to the laws of
nature including the laws of human nature.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter VI. Capitalistic Era"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter VI. Capitalistic Era"/>
<head>Chapter VI. Capitalistic Era</head>

<p>
The immortal work done by Descartes, Newton
and Leibnitz was to discover powerful methods
for mathematics&mdash;the only fit language for expressing
the laws of nature.
</p>

<p>
Human Engineering will be the science by which
the great social problems will be solved. For the
first time since the first day of man, humanity will
really understand its own nature and status; and
will learn to direct scientifically the living and the
non-living forces for construction, avoiding unnecessary
destruction and waste.
</p>

<p>
It may seem strange but it is true that the time-binding
exponential powers, called humans, do not
die&mdash;their bodies die but their achievements live forever&mdash;a
permanent source of power. All of our
precious possessions&mdash;science, acquired by experience,
accumulated wealth in all fields of life&mdash;are
kinetic and potential use-values created and left by
by-gone generations; they are humanity's treasures
produced mainly in the past, and conserved for our
use, by that peculiar function or power of man for
the binding of time. That the natural trend of life
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>
and the progress of the development of this treasury
is so often checked, turned from its natural course,
or set back, is due to ignorance of human nature, to
metaphysical speculation and sophistry. Those who,
with or without intention, keep the rate of humanity's
mental advancement down to that of an arithmetic
progression are the real enemies of society; for they
keep the life-regulating <q>sciences</q> and institutions
far behind the gallop of life itself. The consequence
is periodic social violence&mdash;wars and revolutions.
</p>

<p>
Let us carry the analysis of potential and kinetic
use-values a little further. All potential use-values
left to us by the dead are temporal and differ in
utility. Many potential use-values are found in
museums and have very limited value to-day in practical
life. On the other hand some roads or water-ways
built by the ancients have use-value to-day; and
an almost endless list of modern potential use-values
have or will have use-values for a long time to come,
such as buildings, improved lands, railroad tracks,
certain machines or tools; the use-value of some such
items of material wealth will last for more than one
generation. Kinetic use-values are permanent in
their character, for, though they may become antiquated,
they yet serve as the foundation for the developments
that supersede them, and so they continue
to live in that to which they lead.
</p>

<p>
I would draw attention at this point to one of the
<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>
most important kinetic and potential use-values produced
by humanity&mdash;the invention of the steam
engine. Through this invention, humanity has been
able to avail itself, not only of the living fruits of
dead men's toil, but also of the inconceivably vast
amounts of solar energy and time bound up in the
growth of vegetable life and conserved for use in
the form of coal and other fuels of vegetable origin.
This invention has revolutionized our life in countless
directions. To be brief, I will analyse only the
most salient effects. Human Engineering has never
existed except in the most embryonic form. In
remote antiquity the conception and knowledge of
natural law was wholly absent or exceedingly vague.
Before the invention of the steam engine, people
depended mainly upon human powers&mdash;that is, upon
<q>living powers</q>&mdash;the powers of living men, and the
living fruits of the labor of the dead. Even then
there were manifold complications.
</p>

<p>
The invention of the steam engine released for
human use a new power of tremendous magnitude&mdash;the
stored-up power of solar energy and ages of
time. But we must not fail to note carefully that we
to-day are enabled to use this immense new power
of bound-up solar energy and time by a human invention,
a product of the dead.
</p>

<p>
The full significance of the last statement requires
reflection. The now dead inventor of the steam
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>
engine could not have produced his ingenious invention
except by using the living powers of other dead
men&mdash;except by using the material and spiritual or
mental wealth created by those who had gone before.
In the inventor's intellectual equipment there was
actively present the kinetic use-value of <q>bound-up-time,</q>
enabling him to discover the laws of heat,
water, and steam; and he employed both the potential
and kinetic use-values of mechanical instruments,
methods of work, and scientific knowledge of his
time and generation&mdash;use-values of wealth created
by the genius and toil of by-gone generations. This
invention was not produced, let us say 6000 years
ago, because civilization was not then sufficiently advanced:
mathematically considered, the production
of this great use-value had to await all the accumulated
work of six thousand years of human ingenuity
and human labor. So, if we choose, the steam engine
may be considered a kinetic use-value in which the
factor of time is equal to something like 6000 years,
or let us say roughly 200 generations.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious that, in one life time, even a genius
of the highest order, could not, in aboriginal conditions,
have invented and built a steam engine, when
everything, even iron, was unknown. Of course if
the same inventor could have had a life of several
thousands of years and could have consecutively followed
up all the processes, unhampered by the prejudices
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>
of those days, and been able to make all of
these inventions by himself, he would represent in
himself all the progress of civilization.
</p>

<p>
By this illustration we see the profound meaning
of the words&mdash;the living powers of the dead; we see
the grave importance in human life of the factor
<hi rend="sc">time</hi>; we behold the significance of the time-binding
capacity of man. The steam engine is to be seen
anew, as in the main the accumulated production of
dead-men's work. The life of one generation is
short, and were it not for our human capacity to
inherit the material and spiritual fruit of dead men's
toil, to augment it a little in the brief span of our
own lives, and to transmit it to posterity, the process
of civilization would not be possible and our present
estate would be that of aboriginal man. Civilization
is a creature, its creator is the time-binding power
of man. Animals have it not, because they belong
to a lower type or dimension of life.
</p>

<p>
Sophistry avails nothing here; a child, left in the
woods, would be and remain a savage, matching his
wits with gorillas. He becomes a civilized man only
by the accumulation of, and acquaintance with dead
men's work; for then and only then can he start
where the preceding generation left off. This
capacity is peculiar to men; the fact can not be repeated
too often.
</p>

<p>
It is untrue to say that <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> started his life aided
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>
exclusively by the achievements of (say) his father,
for his father's achievements depended on the
achievements of <emph>his</emph> immediate predecessors; and so
on all the way back through the life of humanity.
This fact, of supreme ethical importance, applies to
<emph>all</emph> of us; none of us may speak or act as if the
material or spiritual wealth we have were produced
by us; for, if we be not stupid, we must see that what
we call <emph>our</emph> wealth, <emph>our</emph> civilization, everything we
use or enjoy, is in the main the product of the labor
of men now dead, some of them slaves, some of them
<q>owners</q> of slaves. The metal spoon or the knife
which we use daily is a product of the work of many
generations, including those who discovered the
metal and the use of it, and the utility of the spoon.
</p>

<p>
And here arises a most important question: Since
the wealth of the world is in the main the free gift
of the past&mdash;the fruit of the labor of the dead&mdash;to
whom does it of right belong? The question can
not be evaded. Is the existing monopoly of the great
inherited treasures produced by dead men's toil a
normal and natural evolution?
</p>

<p>
Or is it an artificial status imposed by the few
upon the many? Such is the crux of the modern
controversy.
</p>

<p>
It is generally known that the invention of the
steam engine and other combustion engines which release
sun-power for mechanical use, has revolutionized
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>
the economic system; for the building of engines
in the scale of modern needs, it is necessary to concentrate
a great number of living men in one place,
to build factories, to set up machines used in producing
the engines, and all this requires the use of
vast amounts of money. That is why this era is
called the capitalistic era. But it is necessary to stop
here and analyse the factors of value in the engine
to be made and in the money used for the purpose of
making use of the stored-up energies of the sun. We
have found that the major part of the engine and all
factors connected with its production are the combined
power of dead men's labor. We have found
that wealth or capital and its symbol, money, are
also, in the main, the bound-up power of dead men's
labor; so that the only way to obtain the benefit in the
release of sun-power, is by using the product of the
toil of the dead. It is further obvious that only the
men or organizations that are able to concentrate the
largest amounts of money, representing the work of
the dead, can have the fullest use of the stored-up
energies of time and the ancient sun. Thus the
monopoly of the stored-up energies of the sun arises
from monopolizing the accumulated fruits of dead
men's toil. These problems will, in the future, be
the concern of the science and art of Human Engineering.
</p>

<p>
Let us glance briefly at the problems from another
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>
angle. The power developed in the combustion of
one pound of coal is theoretically equal to 11,580,000
foot pounds. But by our imperfect methods of utilization,
not more than 1,500,000 foot pounds are
made available. This is about the amount of
physical power exerted by a man of ordinary
strength during a day's work. Hence 300 pounds
of coal will represent the labor of a man for a
year. The current production of coal in the world
is about 500,000,000 tons (1906). If we suppose
that only half of this coal goes for mechanical use,
this will give us approximately the number as 1,600,000,000
man-powers that are producers but not consumers.
</p>

<p>
Let us take a still broader view of resources; we
have approximately 1,600,000,000 living human
beings (all censuses available between 1902 and
1906); a wealth of approximately $357,000,000,000
(<hi rend='italic'>Social Progress</hi>, 1906, page 221) which in our
analysis is dead men's work; and sun-power equal,
in work, to the work of our whole living population,
or equal to 1,600,000,000 sun man-powers. Taking,
for simplicity's sake, $35.70 as the average living expenses
per annum for each one of the <emph>world's</emph> population,
we will have:
</p>

<p>
(1) 1,600,000,000 living men.
</p>

<p>
(2) 10,000,000,000 living man-powers of the
dead.
</p>

<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>

<p>
(3) 1,600,000,000 sun man-powers.
</p>

<p>
Such classification needs a reflection: man is intrinsically
an increasing exponential power and always
produces two use-values&mdash;the potential and the
kinetic. All living men have in some degree this type
of power; <emph>they are able to direct and use basic
powers</emph>.
</p>

<p>
So we see that this world is really populated to-day
by three different populations, all of them
dynamic and active: to wit, 1,600,000,000 living
men; 10,000,000,000 living man-powers of the dead;
1,600,000,000 sun man-powers.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is obvious beyond any argument, <emph>that this
additional producing but not consuming</emph> population,
has been produced mainly by the work of all our past
generations. It is said <q>mainly</q> because, if we were
the first generation, we would be just aboriginal savages
having nothing and progressing very slowly.
The reason why we progress very rapidly, in this
stage of civilization, is explained very clearly by the
mathematical law of a geometrical progression, with
an ever increasing number of terms, the magnitude
of the terms increasing more rapidly all the time.<note place="foot">Of
course, the geometric progression does not represent
<emph>precisely</emph> the law of human progression; it is here employed
because it is familiar and serves, better perhaps than any other
simple mathematical means, to show <emph>roughly</emph> how human progress
goes on. The essential elements of a progression are the
first term <hi rend='italic'>P</hi> and the ratio <hi rend='italic'>R</hi>
and the number of the terms <hi rend='italic'>T</hi>;
in the human progression
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">1</hi>,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>,
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi>, ...
PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi>, P</hi> is the
starting status of the first generation,
<hi rend='italic'>R</hi> is the peculiar capacity
of humans to bind time and is a <emph>free gift</emph> and <emph>law</emph>
of <emph>nature</emph>,
which it would be folly not to recognize and accept as such,
<hi rend='italic'>T</hi> is time, or number of generations. It is obvious that the
magnitude, <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>,
is entirely dependent on the magnitudes of <hi rend='italic'>PR</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>T</hi>. The existence of <hi rend='italic'>R</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> is independent of humans,
<hi rend='italic'>R</hi> being a law of nature, <hi rend='italic'>T</hi>
a gift of nature, <hi rend='italic'>P</hi> the starting status
of the initial generation. With <hi rend='italic'>P = 0</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>R = 0</hi> <hi rend="sc">there would
be no progress</hi> or progression at all; each term in the case
of human progression is mainly dependent upon the time and
the work done by the dead. The existence of
<hi rend='italic'>R</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> is entirely
beyond human control. Humans can control only the <hi rend="sc">magnitude</hi>
of those elements by education. Here comes the tremendous
responsibility of education. It is not necessary to
use much imagination to see that if humanity had always been
rightly educated, science would have long ago discovered the
natural forces and laws essential to human welfare, and human
misery would to-day be relatively small.</note>
</p>

<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>

<p>
This fact is the reason why the old unscientific and
artificial social system requires and must undergo
profound transformation. Human progress, in
many directions, is so far advanced that social institutions
can not much longer continue to lag so far
behind. Static ethics, static jurisprudence, static
economics, and the rest must become dynamic; if
they do not continue to progress peacefully in accordance
with the law of the progress of science, they
will be forced by violent readjustments, recurring
with ever increasing frequency.
</p>

<p>
Here we have a problem of very high importance
and enormous magnitude. To serve 1,600,000,000
living men, we have 11,600,000,000 dead man-powers
and all the sun man-powers&mdash;<hi rend="sc">seven servants
to each living man, woman and child</hi>
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>
included. It looks like the millennium. It would be so
if we but used all this power in a constructive way,
eliminating waste and controversy and all those factors
which hamper production and progress. The
present economic system does not realize even the
beginning of the magnitude of this truth and the
tremendous results which are to be achieved through
the adjustment of it. The problem will be solved by
Human Engineering, for this will establish the right
understanding of values and will show how to manage
world problems scientifically; it will give a scientific
foundation to Political Economy and transform
so-called <q>scientific shop management</q> into genuine
<q>scientific world management.</q><note place="foot">See
<ref target="Appendix_III">Appendix III</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
There is a chasm between <q>Capital</q> and <q>Labor,</q>
but nature does not know <q>Capital</q> or <q>Labor</q> at all.
Nature knows only matter, energy, <q>space,</q> <q>time,</q>
potential and kinetic use-values, forces in all their
direct and indirect expression, the energies of living
men, living powers of dead men, and the bound-up
powers of Time and the ancient Sun. Nature made
man an increasing exponential function of time, a
time-binder, a power able to transform and direct
basic powers. Sometimes we hypocritically like to
delude ourselves, if our delusions are agreeable&mdash;and
profitable. We call human work <q>manual
labor</q> and we pretend that we need the laborer for
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>
his muscular service, but when we thus speak, we are
thoughtless, stupid, or insincere. What we look for
in the worker is his <emph>control</emph> of his muscles; mechanical
work is or can be replaced almost entirely by
machinery. What we will never be able to replace
by machinery is a Man, because man belongs to the
level of a dimension above machinery. Engine-power,
sun man-power, and capital&mdash;mainly the
work of the dead&mdash;are inanimate; they become productive
only when quickened by the time-binding
energies of living men and women. Then only are
the results proportional to the ever growing magnitude
of exponential power. In nature's economy the
time-binders are the intelligent forces. There is none
else known to us, and from the engineer's point of
view, Edison and the simplest laborer, Smith or
Jones, are basically the same; their powers or capacities
are exponential, and, though differing in degree,
are the same in kind. This may seem optimistic but
all engineers are optimists. They deal only with fact
and truth. If they make mistakes, if their bridges
break down, then, no matter how clever their sophistry,
they are adjudged criminal. Like severity must
be made the rule and practice toward all those who
control the institutions and great affairs of human
society. Periodical break-downs must be prevented.
The engineers of human society must be held responsible,
as the bridge engineer is held to-day.
</p>

<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>

<p>
Things are often simpler than they appear at the
first glance. There may be fire and plenty of coal in
a stove, yet no heat; the fire does not burn well; an
engineer will remove the natural causes of obstruction
of the natural process; even such a simple thing
as the removal of ashes may solve the problem. It
seems simple enough. The truth is often clear and
simple, if only it be not obscured and complicated by
sophistry.
</p>

<p>
<q>Capitalistic</q> reasoning and <q>Socialistic</q> reasoning&mdash;Nature
does not know such things. Nature has
only one <q>reasoning</q> in all its functions. Our falsifying
of nature's laws makes the controversy.
Socialism exists as an <hi rend='italic'>ism</hi> because Capitalism exists
as an <hi rend='italic'>ism</hi>; the clash is only an expression of the
eternal law of action and reaction.
</p>

<p>
We are living in a world of wealth, a world enriched
by many generations of dead men's toil; between
the lust of the one to <emph>keep</emph> and the lust of
others to <emph>get</emph>, there is little to choose; such contentions
of lust against lust are <emph>sub</emph>-human&mdash;animalistic;
such ethics is zoological ethics&mdash;the righteousness of
tooth and claw; below the human dimensions of
life, utterly unworthy of the creative energy&mdash;the
time-binding capacity&mdash;of humanity. Socialism
feels keenly and sees dimly that human affairs are
not conducted in conformity with natural laws.
Capitalism neither sees it nor keenly feels it. Neither
<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>
the one nor the other stops to investigate natural
laws&mdash;nature's laws&mdash;laws of human nature&mdash;scientifically.
They both of them use the same speculative
methods in their arguments, and there can be
no issue. Against one old-fashioned, speculative
argument, there is always a speculative answer. They
both speak about the truth, but their methods can
not find the truth nor their language express it. They
speak of <q>justice,</q> <q>right</q> and so forth, not knowing
that their conceptions of those terms are based
on a wrong understanding of values. There is one
and but one remedy, and that remedy consists in
applying scientific method to the study of the subject.
Sound reasoning, once introduced, will overrun
humanity as the fields turn green in the spring;
it will eliminate the waste of energy in controversies;
it will attract all forces toward construction
and the exploitation of nature for the common
weal.
</p>

<p>
There are capitalists and capitalists; there are
socialists and socialists. Among the capitalists there
are those who want wealth&mdash;mainly the fruit of dead
men's toil&mdash;for themselves. Among the socialists
there are those&mdash;the orthodox socialists&mdash;who seek
to disperse it. The former do not perceive that
the product of the labor of the dead is itself dead
if not quickened by the energies of living men. The
orthodox socialists do not perceive the tremendous
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>
benefits that accrue to mankind from the accumulation
of wealth, if <emph>rightly used</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Whether we be capitalists or socialists or neither,
we must learn that to prey upon the treasury left
by the dead is to live, not the life of a human being,
but that of a <emph>ghoul</emph>. Legalistic title&mdash;documentary
ownership&mdash;does not alter the fact. Neither does
lust for the same.
</p>

<p>
When we have acquired the just conception of
what a human being is we shall get away from the
Roman conception according to which a human being
is <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">instrumentum vocale</foreign>;
an animal, <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">instrumentum
semivocale</foreign>: and a tool,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">instrumentum mutum</foreign>. To
regard human beings as tools&mdash;as instruments&mdash;for
the use of other human beings is not only unscientific
but it is repugnant, stupid and short sighted. Tools
are made by man but have not the autonomy of their
maker&mdash;they have not man's time-binding capacity
for initiation, for self-direction, and self-improvement
In their own nature, tools, instruments, machines
belong to a dimension far lower than that of
man.
</p>

<p>
Talk of dimensions or dimensionality is by no
means theoretical rubbish. The right understanding
of dimensions is of life-and-death importance in practical
life. The intermixing of dimensions leads to
wrong conclusions in our thought and wrong conclusions
lead to disasters.
</p>

<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>

<p>
Consider the classes of life as representing three
dimensions (as explained in an earlier chapter), then
human production belongs essentially to the human
or as I call it the third dimension. With the base
of (say) 5, we produce in the third dimension a
result of 125 units, and so when humans are paid
but 25 units in accordance with the standards of the
second dimension (that of animals), humanity is
deprived of the benefit of 100 units of produced
wealth. That is an illustration of what a part dimensions
play in practical life. The reflective reader
may analyse for himself what effect these same rules
would have, if expressed and applied in the human
<q>time-binding</q> dimension, time being the supreme
test. The following table gives the visual shock:
</p>

<table>
<row><cell>1st Dimension</cell><cell>2nd Dimension</cell><cell>3rd Dimension</cell></row>
<row><cell>5</cell><cell>25</cell><cell>125</cell></row>
<row><cell>10</cell><cell>100</cell><cell>1,000</cell></row>
<row><cell>100</cell><cell>10,000</cell><cell>1,000,000</cell></row>
<row><cell>1,000</cell><cell>1,000,000</cell><cell>1,000,000,000</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
This explains why the intermixing of dimensions
is the source of tremendous evil.
</p>

<p>
Who can now assert that the problem of dimensions
is one only of theory? It is not even a question
of limitation of mind, but it becomes a
question of limitation of eyesight, not to be able to
see the overwhelming differences between the laws
of development of the first, second, and the third
dimension.
</p>

<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>

<p>
Dollars, or pounds sterling, or other units of
money follow the same rules: the strength and in
fact the source of power of modern capitalism, is
found in just this difference in dimensions&mdash;in the
difference between what is given and what is taken,
in the difference between what is earned and what is
<q>made.</q> The problem of dimensions is, therefore,
a key which unlocks the secrets of the power of capitalism
and opens the door to a new civilization where
the understanding of dimensions will establish order
out of the chaos.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that kinetic and potential use-values,
produced mainly by the dead, are bound up in wealth,
which is measured and symbolized by money. This
being true, it is obvious that money is a measure and
symbol of power, of work done, of bound-up time.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>space</emph>-binding <emph>animal</emph> standard of miscivilization
has brought us to an impasse&mdash;a blind alley&mdash;for
the simple physical reason that there is no more
space to <q>bind.</q> Practically all the habitable lands,
and practically all the natural resources, are already
divided among private legalistic owners. What hope
is there for the ever increasing population?
</p>

<p>
But we have these 1,600,000,000 living men;
10,000,000,000 living man-powers of the dead; and
1,600,000,000 sun man-powers: that is indeed a tremendous
power to <hi rend="sc">produce wealth for all, if
wisely directed</hi>, but to-day it is ignorantly and
<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>
shamefully misdirected, because human beings are not
treated in accordance with their nature as the time-binding
class of life.
</p>

<p>
Much more is to be gained in exploiting nature
aimfully, all the time, with a full mobilization of our
living, dead, and sun-powers, than by exploiting man
all the time and nature occasionally. Selfishness and
ignorance&mdash;is it these that prevent full mobilization
of the producing powers of the world?
</p>

<p>
Such as contribute most to human progress and
human enlightenment&mdash;men like Gutenberg, Copernicus,
Newton, Leibnitz, Watts, Franklin, Mendeleieff,
Pasteur, Sklodowska-Curie, Edison, Steinmetz,
Loeb, Dewey, Keyser, Whitehead, Russell, Poincaré,
William Benjamin Smith, Gibbs, Einstein, and many
others&mdash;consume no more bread than the simplest
of their fellow mortals. Indeed such men are often
in want. How many a genius has perished inarticulate
because unable to stand the strain of social conditions
where animal standards prevail and <q>survival
of the fittest</q> means, not survival of the <q>fittest in
time-binding capacity,</q> but survival of the strongest
in ruthlessness and guile&mdash;in space-binding competition!
</p>

<p>
Wealth is produced by those who work with hand
or brain and by no others. The great mass of the
wealth of the world has been thus produced by generations
that have gone. We know that the greatest
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>
wealth producers&mdash;immeasurably the greatest&mdash;have
been and are scientific men, discoverers and inventors.
If an invention, in the course of a few
years after it is made, must become public property,
then the wealth produced by the <emph>use</emph> of the invention
should also become public property in the course
of a like period of years after it is thus produced.
Against this proposition no sophistry can avail.
</p>

<p>
One of the greatest powers of modern times is
the Press; it commands the resources of space and
time; it affects in a thousand subtle ways the form
of our thoughts. It controls the exchange of news
throughout the world. Unfortunately the press is
often controlled by exploiters of the <q>living powers
of the dead,</q> and so what is presented as news is
frequently so limited, colored and distorted by selfish
interests as to be falsehood in the guise of truth.
Honest, independent papers are frequently starved
by selfish conspirators and forced to close down.
Thus the press, which is itself the product in the
main of dead men's toil, is made a means for the
deception and exploitation of the living. Indeed the
bitter words of Voltaire seem to be too true: <q>Since
God created man in his own image, how often has
man endeavored to render similar service to God.</q>
Those who want to use such <q>God-like</q> powers to
rule the world are modern Neros, who in their
wickedness and folly fancy themselves divine. To
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>
deceive, and through deception, to exploit, rob and
subjugate living men and women, and to do it by
prostituting the living powers created by the dead,
is the work, I will not say of men, but of <emph>mad</emph> men,
greedy, ignorant and blind. What is the remedy?
Revolution? Revolution is also mad. The only
remedy is enlightenment&mdash;knowledge, knowledge of
nature, knowledge of human nature, scientific education,
science applied to all the affairs of man&mdash;the
science and art of Human Engineering.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter VII. Survival of the Fittest"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter VII. Survival of the Fittest"/>
<head>Chapter VII. Survival of the Fittest</head>

<p>
Humanity is a dynamic affair, nay, the most
dynamic known, because it is able to transform
and direct basic powers. Where power is produced
there must be an issue for it. Power must perforce
express itself in some form. Electricity produced in
the skies comes down in an often disastrous manner.
Electricity, produced aimfully, runs our railroads;
just so the enormous power produced by humanity
must be used aimfully, in a constructive way or it
will burst into insurrections, revolutions and wars.
</p>

<p>
Hitherto we have been guided by those bottomless
sciences having only mythological ideas of power&mdash;by
ideas moulded by personal ambitions, personal
interests, or downright ignorance. Periodically we
have had all the evils of the lack of a common aim
and scientific guidance. Power has been held by the
<q>God-given</q> or the <q>cleverest</q>; seldom has the
power been given to the <q>fittest</q> in the sense of the
most capable <q>to do.</q> Those who speak of the
<q>survival of the fittest,</q> as in the Darwinian theory
of animals, bark an animal language. This rule,
being natural only in the life of plants and animals
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>
and appropriate only to the lower forms of physical
life, cannot, except with profound change of meaning,
be applied to the time-binding class of life, without
disaster.
</p>

<p>
The modern vast accumulation of wealth for private
purposes, justifies itself by using the argument
of the <q>survival of the fittest.</q> Very well, where
there is a <q>survival,</q> there must be victims; where
there are victims, there has been fighting. Is this
what the users of this argument mean? Like the
Kaiser, they talk peace and make war. This method
of doing things is not in any way new. The world
has been accustomed to it for a very long while.
</p>

<p>
Personally I believe that most of the masters of
speculative semi-sciences, such as economics, law,
ethics, politics and government are honest in their
beliefs and speculations. Simply the right man believes
in the wrong thing; if shown the right way
out of the mess he will cease to hamper progress; he
will be of the greatest value to the new world built
by Human Engineers, where human capacities, exponential
functions of time, will operate naturally;
where economy, law, ethics, politics and government
will be <emph>dynamic</emph>, not <emph>static</emph>. There is a world of difference
between these two words.
</p>

<p>
The immediate object of this writing is to show
the way to directing the time-binding powers of mankind
for the benefit of all. Human technology, as an
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>
art and science, does not yet exist; some basic principles
were required as a foundation for such a
science. Especially was it necessary to establish a
<emph>human</emph> standard, and thus make it certain and clear
that <q>space-binders</q>&mdash;the members of the <emph>animal</emph>
world&mdash;are <q>outside of the human law</q>&mdash;outside
the natural laws for the human class of life.
</p>

<p>
Present civilization is a very complicated affair;
although many of our social problems are very badly
managed, sudden changes could not be made without
endangering the welfare and life of all classes of
society. In the meantime, changes must be made
because the world can not proceed much longer under
pre-war conditions; they have been too well exposed
by facts for humanity to allow itself to be blindly
led again.
</p>

<p>
In the World War humanity passed through a
tremendous trial and for those years was under the
strain of an extensive mobilization campaign. The
necessity of increasing power was manifest; the importance
of a common base or aim became equally
manifest. In this case the base, the common aim,
was found in <q>war patriotism.</q> This common base
enabled all the states to add up individual powers
and build maximum efficiency into a <emph>collective</emph>
power. This expression is used, not only as a social
truth, but as a known mathematical truth. Those
high ideals, which were given <q>Urbi et orbi</q> in thousands
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>
of speeches and in millions of propaganda
papers, had a much greater educational importance
and influence than most people are aware of. People
have been awakened and have acquired the taste for
those higher purposes which in the past were available
only for the few.
</p>

<p>
Many old worn-out idols, ideas and ideals have
fallen; but what is going to take their place? We
witness an unrest which will not be eliminated until
something essential is done to adjust it. Calm often
betokens a coming storm. The coming storm is not
the work of any <q>bad man,</q> but it is the inevitable
consequence of a <q>bad system.</q> It is dangerous
to hide our heads in the sand, like an ostrich, and
fancy we are safe.
</p>

<p>
<q>Survival of the fittest</q> in the commonly used animal
sense is not a theory or principle for a <q>time-binding</q>
being. This theory is only for the physical
bodies of animals; its effect upon humanity is sinister
and degrading (see <ref target="Appendix_III">App. II</ref>). We see the principle
at work all about us in criminal exploitation and
profiteering. As a matter of fact, the ages-long application
of this animal principle to human affairs
has degraded the whole human morale in an inconceivably
far-reaching way. Personal greed and selfishness
are brazenly owned as principles of conduct.
We shrug our shoulders in acquiescence and proclaim
greed and selfishness to be the very core of human
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>
nature, take it all for granted, and let it pass at that.
We have gone so far in our degradation that the
prophet of capitalistic principles, Adam Smith, in his
famous <hi rend='italic'>Wealth of Nations</hi>, arrives at the laws of
wealth, not from the phenomena of wealth nor from
statistical statements, but from the phenomena of
selfishness&mdash;a fact which shows how far-reaching in
its dire influence upon all humanity is the theory that
human beings are <q>animals.</q> Of course the effect
is very disastrous. The preceding chapters have
shown that the theory is false; it is false, not only
because of its unhappy effects, but it belies the characteristic
nature of man. Human nature, this time-binding
power, not only has the peculiar capacity
for perpetual progress, but it has, over and above
all animal propensities, certain qualities constituting
it a distinctive dimension or type of life. Not only
our whole collective life proves a love for higher
ideals, but even our dead <emph>give</emph> us the rich heritage,
material and spiritual, of all their toils. There is
nothing mystical about it; to call <hi rend="sc">such</hi> a class a
<emph>naturally</emph> selfish class is not only nonsensical but
monstrous.
</p>

<p>
This capacity for higher ideals does not originate
in some <q><emph>super</emph>natural</q> outside factor; it is <emph>not</emph> of
extraneous origin, it is the expression of the time-binding
element which we <emph>inherently</emph> possess, independently
of our <q>will</q>; it is an inborn capacity&mdash;a
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>
<emph>gift</emph> of nature. We simply are made this way and
not in any other. There is indeed a fine sense in
which we can, if we choose, apply the expression&mdash;survival
of the fittest&mdash;to the activity of the time-binding
energies of man. Having the peculiar capacity
to survive in our deeds, we have an inclination
to use it and we survive in the deeds of our
creation; and so there is brought about the <q>survival
in time</q> of higher and higher ideals. The moment
we consider Man in his proper dimension&mdash;active
in <hi rend="sc">time</hi>&mdash;these things become simple, stupendous,
and beautiful.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Note the radical character of the transformation to be
effected. The world shall no longer be beheld as an alien
thing, beheld by eyes that are not its own. Conception of
the whole and by the whole shall embrace <emph>us</emph> as <emph>part</emph>, really,
literally, consciously, as the latest term, it may be, of an
advancing sequence of developments, as occupying the highest
rank perhaps in the ever-ascending hierarchy of being,
but, at all events, as emerged and still emerging
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">natura
naturata</foreign> from some propensive source within. I grant that
the change in point of view is hard to make&mdash;old habits,
like walls of rock, tending to confine the tides of consciousness
within their accustomed channels&mdash;but it can be made
and, by assiduous effort, in the course of time, maintained.
Suppose it done. By that reunion, the whole regains, while
the part retains, the consciousness the latter purloined....
In the whole universe of events, none is more wonderful
than the birth of wonder, none more curious than the
nascence of curiosity itself, nothing to compare with the
dawning of consciousness in the ancient dark and the gradual
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>
extension of psychic life and illumination throughout a cosmos
that before had only <emph>been</emph>. An eternity of blindly acting,
transforming, unconscious existence, assuming at length,
through the birth of sense and intellect, without loss or break
of continuity, the abiding form of fleeting time.</q> (C. J.
Keyser, loc. cit.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
It must be emphasized that the development of
higher ideals is due to the <emph>natural</emph> capacity of humanity;
the impulse is simply time-binding impulse.
As we have seen, by analysing the functions of the
different classes of life, every class of life has an
impulse to exercise its peculiar capacity or function.
Nitrogen resists compound combinations and if
found in such combinations it breaks away as quickly
as ever it can. Birds have wings&mdash;they fly. Animals
have feet&mdash;they run. Man has the capacity of time-binding&mdash;he
binds time. It does not matter whether
we understand the very <q>essence</q> of the phenomenon
or not, any more than we understand the <q>essence</q>
of electricity or any other <q>essence.</q> Life shows
that man has time-binding capacity as a natural gift
and is naturally impelled to use it. One of the best
examples is procreation. Conception is a completely
incomprehensible phenomenon in its <q>essence,</q>
nevertheless, having the capacity to procreate
we use it without bothering about its <q>essence.</q>
Indeed neither life nor science bothers about <q>essences</q>&mdash;they
leave <q>essences</q> to metaphysics,
which is neither life nor science. It is sufficient for
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>
our purpose that idealization is in fact a natural
process of time-binding human energy. And however
imperfect ethics has been owing to the prevalence
of animal standards, such merits as our ethics
has had witness to the natural presence of <q>idealization</q>
in time-binding human life.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>It is thus evident that ideals are not things to gush over
or to sigh and sentimentalize about; they are not what would
be left if that which is hard in reality were taken away;
ideals are themselves the very flint of reality, beautiful no
doubt and precious, without which there would be neither
dignity nor hope nor light; but their aspect is not sentimental
and soft; it is hard, cold, intellectual, logical, austere. Idealization
consists in the conception or the intuition of ideals and
in the pursuit of them. And ideals, I have said, are of two
kinds. Let us make the distinction clearer. Every sort of
human activity&mdash;shoeing horses, abdominal surgery, or painting
profiles&mdash;admits of a peculiar type of excellence. No sort
of activity can escape from its own type but within its type
it admits of indefinite improvement. For each type there is
an ideal&mdash;a dream of perfection&mdash;an unattainable limit of
an endless sequence of potential ameliorations within the type
and on its level. The dreams of such unattainable perfections
are as countless as the types of excellence to which they
respectively belong and they together constitute the familiar
world of our human ideals. To share in it&mdash;to feel the lure
of perfection in one or more types of excellence, however
lowly&mdash;is to be human; not to feel it is to be sub-human.
But this common kind of idealization, though it is very important
and very precious, does not produce the great events
in the life of mankind. These are produced by the kind of
idealization that corresponds to what we have called in the
mathematical prototype, limit-begotten generalization&mdash;a kind
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>
of idealization that is peculiar to creative genius and that,
not content to pursue ideals within established types of excellences,
creates new types thereof in science, in art, in philosophy,
in letters, in ethics, in education, in social order, in
all the fields and forms of the spiritual life of man.</q> (Quoted
from the manuscript of the forthcoming book, <hi rend='italic'>Mathematical
Philosophy</hi>, by Cassius J. Keyser.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
<q>Survival of the fittest</q> has a different form for
different classes of life. Applying animal standards
to time-binding beings is like applying inches to
measuring weight. As a matter or fact, we cannot
raise one class to a higher class, unless we add an
entirely new function to the former; we can only
improve their lower status; but if we apply the
reverse method, we can degrade human standards
to animal standards.
</p>

<p>
Animal standards belong to a class of life whose
capacity is <emph>not</emph> an <emph>exponential</emph> function of <emph>Time</emph>.
There is nothing theological or sentimental in this
fact; it is a purely mathematical truth.
</p>

<p>
It is fatal to apply the <q>survival of the fittest</q>
theory in the same sense to two radically different
classes of life. The <q>survival of the fittest</q> for animals&mdash;for
<emph>space</emph>-binders&mdash;is survival <emph>in space</emph>, which
means fighting and other brutal forms of struggle;
on the other hand, <q>survival of the fittest</q> for
human beings <emph>as such</emph>&mdash;that is, for <emph>time-binders</emph>&mdash;is
survival <emph>in time</emph>, which means intellectual or spiritual
competition, struggle for excellence, for making the
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>
<emph>best</emph> survive. The-fittest-in-time&mdash;those who make
the best survive&mdash;are those who do the most in producing
values for all mankind including <emph>posterity</emph>.
This is the scientific base for natural ethics, and
ethics from which there can be no side-stepping, or
escape.
</p>

<p>
Therefore time-binders can not use <q><emph>animal</emph></q> logic
without degrading themselves from their proper
status as human beings&mdash;their status as established
by nature. <q>Animal</q> logic leads to <q>animal</q> ethics
and <q>animal</q> economics; it leads inevitably to
a brutalized industrial system in which cunning
contrives to rob the living of the fruit of the
dead.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Human</emph> logic points to human ethics and human
economics; it will lead to a humanized industrial system
in which competition will be competition in science,
in art, in justice: a competition and struggle for
the attainment of excellence in human life. The time-binding
capacity, which manifests itself in drawing
from the <hi rend="sc">past</hi>, through the <hi rend="sc">present</hi>
for the <hi rend="sc">future</hi>
gives human beings the means of attaining a precious
kind of immortality; it enables them to fulfill the
law of their own class of life and to survive everlastingly
in the fruits of their toil, a perpetual blessing
to endless generations of the children of men.
This is the truth we instinctively recognize when we
call a great man <q>immortal.</q> We mean that he has
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>
done deeds that <emph>survive in time</emph> for the perpetual
weal of mankind.
</p>

<p>
Human logic&mdash;mathematical logic, the logic <emph>natural</emph>
for man&mdash;will thus show us that <q>good</q> and
<q>just</q> and <q>right</q> are to have their significance
defined and understood entirely in terms of human
<emph>nature</emph>. Human nature&mdash;not animal nature&mdash;is to
be the basis and guide of Human Engineering. Thus
based and guided, Human Engineering will eliminate
<q>wild-cat schemers,</q> gamblers and <q>politicians.</q> It
will put an end to industrial violence, strikes, insurrections,
war and revolutions.
</p>

<p>
The present system of social life is largely built
upon misconceptions or misrepresentations. For all
work we need the human brain, the human time-binding
power, yet we continue to call it <q>hand-labor</q>
and treat it as such. Even in mechanical science,
in the use of the term <q>horse-power,</q> we are incorrect
in this expression. How does this <q>horse</q> look
in reality? Let us analyse this <q>horse.</q> All science,
all mechanical appliances have been produced by
<q>man</q> and man alone. Everything we possess is the
production of either dead men's or living men's
work. The enslavement of the solar man-power is
purely a human invention in theory and practice.
Everything we have is evidently therefore a time-binding
product. What perfect nonsense to call a
purely human achievement the equivalent of so much
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>
<q>horse-power</q>! Of course it does not matter mathematically
what name we give to a unit of power;
we may call it a Zeus or a Zebra; but there is a very
vicious implication in using the name of an animal
to denote a purely human product. Everything in
our civilization was produced by <hi rend="sc">man</hi>; it seems only
reasonable that this unit of power which is the direct
product of Man's work, should be correctly named
after him. The educational effect would be wholesome
and tremendous. The human value in work
would be thus emphasized again and again, and respect
for human work would be taught, from the
beginning in the schools. This <q>horse-power</q> unit
causes us to forget the human part in it and it degrades
human work to the level of a commodity.
This is an example of the degrading influence of
wrong conceptions and wrong language. I said
<q>educational</q> because even our subconscious mind is
affected by this. (See <ref target="Appendix_II">App. II</ref>.)
</p>

<p>
Human Engineering will not interfere with any
scientific research; on the contrary, it will promote
it in many ways. Grown-ups, it is to be hoped, will
stop the nonsense of intermixing dimensions, for
which we chastise children. It is the same kind of
blundering as when we intermix phenomena&mdash;measuring
<q>God</q> by human standards, or human beings
by animal standards. The relationship, if any, between
these phenomena or the overlapping of different
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>
classes, is interesting and important; but in
studying such relationships of classes, it is fatal to
mix the classes; for example, if we are studying the
relations between surfaces and solids, it is fatal to
mistake solids for surfaces; just so, too, if we stupidly
confuse humans with animals.
</p>

<p>
In the reality of life, we are interested only in the
values of the function of the phenomena by themselves
and to arrive at right conclusions we have to
use units appropriate to the phenomena. The intermixing
of units gives us a wrong conception of the
values of each phenomenon; the results of our calculations
are wrong and the outcome is a misconception
of the process of human life. The fact once
realized, we will cease applying animal measures to
man; even theology will abandon the monstrous
habit.
</p>

<p>
Animal units and standards are to be applied to
animals, human standards to man, <q>Divine</q> standards
to <q>God.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the dark ages, with the complete innocence or
misunderstanding of science, the <q>why</q> of things was
explained by the <q>who</q> of things; therein investigation
culminated; man was regarded as <hi rend='italic'>homo sapiens</hi>
and homo sapiens = animal × spark of <hi rend='italic'>super</hi>natural;
this monstrous formula was accepted as a final
truth&mdash;as an answer to the question: What is Man?
This type of answer became in the hands of church
<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>
and state a powerful instrument for keeping the
people in subjection.
</p>

<p>
The tendency of the masses to let others think for
them is not really a <emph>natural</emph> characteristic&mdash;quite the
opposite. The habit of not thinking for one's self
is the result of thousands of years of subjection.
Those in authority, in general, used their ingenuity
to keep the people from thinking. The most vital
reason why many humans appear to be, and are often
called, <q>stupid,</q> is that they have been spoken to in
a language of speculation which they instinctively
dislike and distrust; thus there arose the proverb that
speech was made to conceal the truth. It is no wonder
that they appear <q>stupid,</q> the wonder is that
they are not more <q>stupid.</q> The truth is that they
will be found to be far less stupid when addressed
in the natural language of ascertainable fact. My
whole theory is based upon, and is in harmony with,
the natural feelings of man. The conceptions I introduce
are based on human <emph>nature</emph>. Natural language&mdash;so
different from the speech of metaphysical
speculation&mdash;will lead to mutual understanding and
the disappearance of warring factions.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Discrimination, as the proverb rightly teaches, is the beginning
of mind. The first psychic product of that initial
psychic act is <emph>numerical</emph>: to discriminate
is to produce <emph>two</emph>,
the simplest possible example of multiplicity. The discovery,
or better the invention, better still the production,
best of all the creation, of multiplicity with its correlate of
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>
number, is, therefore, the most primitive achievement or manifestation
of mind.... Let us, then, trust the arithmetic
instinct as fundamental and, for instruments of thought that
shall not fail, repair at once to the domain of number.</q> (C.
J. Keyser, Loc. Cit.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The thinking few knew the power there is in
<q>thinking</q>; they wanted to have it and to keep the
advantage of it for themselves; witness the late introduction
of public schools. Belief in the inferiority of
the masses became the unwritten law of the <q>privileged
classes</q>; it was forced upon, rubbed into, the
subconscious mind of the masses by church and state
alike, and was humbly and dumbly accepted by the
<q>lower orders</q> as their <q>destiny.</q> Ignorance was
proclaimed as a bliss.
</p>

<p>
As time went on, this <q>coefficient of ignorance</q>
became so useful to some people and some classes of
people that no effort was spared to keep the world
in ignorance. It gave a legalistic excuse to imprison,
burn and hang people for expressing an opinion
which the ruling classes did not like. The elimination
from church, from school, from universities, of
any teacher, any professor or any minister who dared
to exemplify or encourage fearless investigation and
freedom of speech became very common. It is less
common in our generation, but there remains much
to win in the way of freedom.
</p>

<p>
Freedom, rightly understood, is the aim of Human
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>
Engineering. But freedom is not license, it is not
licentiousness. Freedom consists in <emph>lawful</emph> living&mdash;in
living in accord with the laws of human <emph>nature</emph>&mdash;in
accord with the <emph>natural</emph> laws of Man. A plant
is free when it is not prevented from living and
growing according to the natural laws of plant life;
an animal is free when it is not prevented from living
according to the natural laws of animal life;
human beings are free when and only when they are
not prevented from living in accord with the natural
laws of human life. I say <q>when not prevented,</q>
for human beings will live <emph>naturally</emph> and, therefore,
in freedom, when they are not prevented from thus
living by ignorance of what human nature is and by
artificial social systems established, maintained, and
protected by such ignorance. Human freedom consists
in exercising the time-binding energies of man
in accordance with the natural laws of such natural
energies. Human freedom is thus the aim of Human
Engineering because Human Engineering is to be
the science of human nature and the art of conducting
human affairs in accordance with the laws of
human nature. Survival of the fittest, where <emph>fittest</emph>
means <emph>strongest</emph>, is a <emph>natural</emph> law for brutes, for animals,
for the class of mere <emph>space</emph>-binders. Survival
of the fittest, where <emph>fittest</emph> means <emph>best</emph> in science and
art and wisdom, is a <emph>natural</emph> law for mankind, the
time-binding class of life.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter VIII. Elements Of Power"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter VIII. Elements Of Power"/>
<head>Chapter VIII. Elements Of Power</head>

<p>
In the World War Germany displayed tremendous
<emph>power</emph>. Restraining our emotions as much
as possible, let us endeavor to analyse that power
with mathematical dispassionateness.
</p>

<p>
Why did Germany display more power than any
other single nation? Because in the establishment of
her <q>ethics,</q> her political system, and her economic
structure, Germany availed herself, in larger measure
than any other nation, of scientific achievements
and scientific methods. It is a very common, very
erroneous, and very harmful belief that war was created
solely by a <q>war-lord.</q> Every idea or movement
doubtless originates with somebody but back of
such <q>originations</q> or initiations there are favoring
conditions, forces and impulsions. The stage is set
by life and the ages; the actor enters and the show
begins. In the instance in question, the stage was
set by our whole modern system of civilization. The
war lords were the <q>Deus ex machina</q>&mdash;the show
was a real one&mdash;a tragedy.
</p>

<p>
The true origin of this war must be looked for
<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>
in the economic field. Our economic system is the
very complicated result of all our creeds, philosophies
and social customs. It is therefore impossible
to understand the working of the economic forces
without understanding the foundation upon which
this system of forces is based. A short list of works
on the subject is given at the end of this book. A
plain statement here will be enough.
</p>

<p>
Germany was committed to a policy of indefinite
industrial expansion. This artificial expansion had
reached its limits. Germany was on the verge of
bankruptcy. Only a victorious war could avoid a
national catastrophe; she played her last card, and
lost despite her gigantic power, the greatest ever
displayed by any nation. The leading European
states were not able to overpower her for a long
time. This writing is not intended as an apology
for Germany, much less to praise her or her war
lords. German purposes were nationally narrow
and nationally selfish to the root; her methods were
inhuman but Germany displayed power; and without
the understanding of power, Human Engineering is
impossible.
</p>

<p>
It is possibly a fault of the writer's military training,
but it seems to him that the <q>General Staff</q>
point of view has as much claim to consideration as
any other among the many different interpretations
of history&mdash;perhaps it has more. It is not the primary
<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>
aim of the general staff to <q>fight,</q> very far
from it. Their primary aim is <q>victory</q> and all the
better if victory be possible without a fight. Strategy,
brain-work, intelligence, knowledge of facts&mdash;these
are the chief weapons; brutal fighting is only a last
resort. It is highly important to bear that in mind.
Soldiers and engineers do not argue&mdash;they act. Germany
affords the first example of a philosophy or a
society having for its main purpose the generating
of power to <q>do things.</q> It seems only reasonable
and intelligent to analyse the history of the war
from the engineer's point of view, which, in this case,
happens to coincide with the military point of view.
It must be clearly understood that the modern general
staff, or military, point of view has very little or
nothing to do with the romance or poetry of war.
War to-day is a grim business&mdash;but <q>business</q> before
all else. It has to mobilize all the resources of a
nation and generate power to the limit of its
capacity. The conduct of war to-day is a technological
affair&mdash;its methods have to be engineering
methods. To crush an obstacle, there is need of a
giant hammer, and the more mass that can be given
it and the greater the force put behind it, the more
deadly will be the blow. Prior to the World War
technology had not been mobilized on so vast a scale
nor confronted with a task so gigantic. Mobilized
technology has revealed and demonstrated the fact
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>
that it is possible to generate almost unlimited power
and has shown the way to do it; at the same time
it has demonstrated the measureless potency of engineering
and our utter helplessness without it. Technology
is comparatively a new science; by some it is
called a <q>semi-science</q> because it deals primarily
with the application of science to practical issues.
But when it became necessary <q>to do things,</q> an
engineer had to be called; the general staff had to
adopt his view, and all other practices and traditions
were bent to his ideas.
</p>

<p>
I have already repeatedly pointed out that the
progress of technology proceeds according to a law
like that of a rapidly increasing geometrical progression,
and I have stressed the danger of inattention
to any phenomena, force or movement that conforms
to such a law. We have only to recollect the story
of the simple but very greedy farmer who was very
happy to make a contract with a laborer for a
month's work, paying him only one cent the first day,
twice as much the second, twice for the third, and so
on to the end. Behold! The bill for the month ran
into millions of dollars and the farmer was ruined.
Such is the deadly secret of the geometrical progression.
Violent readjustments await any society whose
ethics, jurisprudence and the like do not keep pace
with the developments of engineering.
</p>

<p>
Engineers are the wizards who, using the results
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>
of scientific research, can subjugate or release the
concealed powers of nature. The supreme factor is
the use of the mind&mdash;the exponential function of time&mdash;the
time-binding energy of man. From that we
have to take our start because that is the source of
human power.
</p>

<p>
The German philosophy, as a whole, has its definite
place in the history of philosophy; and the first
thing to consider are those philosophic writers who
directly and indirectly have contributed to the building
up of German power. Hegel greatly affected the
building up of the German mind&mdash;strange as it may
seem; but Hegel was greatly under the influence of
the work of Fichte, and Fichte in turn under that of
Spinoza. All of them were, in a way, mathematicians
in their methods and philosophy, as much as
they could be in their time. I said <q>strange,</q> because
it is significant that the mathematical part of
their philosophy was just the part which built up the
German power. But if we look into it, it is not
strange.
</p>

<p>
It had to be so, because mathematical and mechanical
methods are the only ones by which power
can be understood and built. Hegel in 1805 lectured
on history of philosophy, pure mathematics and natural
law. It would be hard to find a better combination
for a philosophy of power. That is precisely
what this philosophy was. It influenced not only German
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>
philosophy but even German theology, and
through these channels it sank deep into the national
consciousness. It affected every phase of life. An
immense cult of disciples arose. Each one added
something to that philosophy of power. One of the
most brilliant representatives of this movement is
Professor Oswald, who in his <hi rend='italic'>Monist Sermons</hi> gave
the famous advice: <q>Do not waste energy but give it
value.</q> The German understanding of the great
value of technology directly applied that principle to
their philosophy, law, ethics, politics, and so on.
</p>

<p>
With increase of population, the problem of the
State becomes more and more pressing. There are
many theories about the state. For the purpose of
the moment it is important to realize that a state
is the governing center of an accumulation of human
beings&mdash;of time-binding powers&mdash;increasing exponential
functions of time. These powers, though
the same in kind, differ in degree and in respect of
individuality. If they are to be united so as to
constitute a whole, they must be given a common
aim; they must, so to speak, be reduced to a common
base; if they be respectively
<hi rend='italic'>X<hi rend="vertical-align: super">m</hi></hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Z<hi rend="vertical-align: super">p</hi></hi>, and
so on, we can not unite them and compute the whole
by adding the exponents; but if we give them a common
base&mdash;a common aim or purpose&mdash;then we can
readily represent the magnitudes of the whole constituted
by them; if we take <hi rend='italic'>X</hi> to be their common
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>
aim or base, then, if <hi rend='italic'>Y</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>aX</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Z</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>bX</hi>, and so on, we
shall have:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>X<hi rend="vertical-align: super">m</hi></hi> ×
<hi rend='italic'>Y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi> ×
<hi rend='italic'>Z<hi rend="vertical-align: super">p</hi></hi> ... =
<hi rend='italic'>X<hi rend="vertical-align: super">m</hi></hi> ×
<hi rend='italic'>a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi> ×
<hi rend='italic'>X<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi> ×
<hi rend='italic'>b<hi rend="vertical-align: super">p</hi></hi> ×
<hi rend='italic'>X<hi rend="vertical-align: super">p</hi></hi> ...
= (<hi rend='italic'>a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi></hi> ×
<hi rend='italic'>b<hi rend="vertical-align: super">p</hi></hi>
...)<hi rend='italic'>X<hi rend="vertical-align: super">m+n+p</hi></hi> ...
</p>

<p>
The last expression, where the parenthetical coefficient
is the product of individualities, serves to
represent the united powers of all in terms of <hi rend='italic'>X</hi>,
the common base, purpose or aim.
</p>

<p>
Let us look at the matter in another way. One
mechanical <q>horse-power</q> is less than the power of
one living horse. One living horse can do more
work than one mechanical horse-power, but in using
more than one living horse at one time we get less
work than by using the same number of mechanical
horse-powers; the reason is very obvious. The mechanical
horse-powers are the same in kind, equal,
and constant, but living horses differ in character,
they are not equal, and each one is a variable. Hence
mechanical horse-powers can be added or multiplied
arithmetically, but the powers of living horses can
not, except very roughly; the living horses of a team
interfere with each other; they do not pull together,
as we say, and energy is lost.
</p>

<p>
The German mathematical philosophy or theory
of the state did not express itself in just this way,
but the foregoing gives a clue to it. Germany united
the powers of living men and women and children;
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>
it gave them a common base; it gave them one common
<q>social</q> mood and aim; they all became consolidated
in service of that which is called the State;
they studied and taught for the State; they worked,
lived and died for the State: the State was their idol,
King and God.
</p>

<p>
Such was the aim of German philosophy, theology,
law and science. The establishment of <hi rend="sc">one aim</hi> for
all was the decisive factor. It is obvious that if we
want to inspire 60 Millions of individuals with one
aim, this aim can not be private or personal. It
must be a higher aim, collective, general, impersonal,
in some way uniting and including all personal aims.
I shall call it simply a <hi rend='italic'>collective</hi> aim. But collective
aims may differ profoundly in kind; out of personal
or egoistic aims there grows a series of collective
aims, increasing in generality, such as: (1) Family
aims; (2) association, congregation, club aims; (3)
class or professional aims; (4) national or race aims;
and finally (5) <hi rend="sc">human aims</hi>&mdash;the natural aims for
the time-binding class of life. The fatal error of
German political philosophy was an error of aim&mdash;her
aim was too low&mdash;too narrow&mdash;the welfare of
a state instead of the welfare of Humanity.
</p>

<p>
In the case of Germany, the national aim was
equivalent to the state aim. German philosophy
made the <q>state</q> equivalent to the <q>good</q> and equivalent
to <q>power.</q> Of course such philosophy influenced
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>
the whole national life in every detail; in consequence
Germany proclaimed herself the first nation
of the world, and this soon evolved into a plan for
the conquest of the world. The German General
Staff as an institution had, par excellence, as its aim
and first object, <q>power,</q> <q>concentration of power</q>
and <q>efficiency.</q> It took the leadership in all
branches of life and industry. Militarism and industrialism
are almost synonymous from the mechanical
point of view; they are both of them power. They
both have to use the same scientific methods and
in the <emph>present</emph> conditions of the world they are dependent
upon each other, for war cannot be waged
without strong industries. Here we have to face
the fact that geometrically progressing industry can
not live without new markets, which under present
conditions have been largely acquired, directly or indirectly,
by the power of the army; and this has been
the case with Germany. If we curse Germany for
being a <q>military nation</q> we can, with no less justice,
curse her for being a <emph>completely</emph> <q>industrialized
nation.</q> If we add to that her nationally selfish
and narrow national aim, we will readily understand
this <q>world peach.</q> Those who have tasted it know
something of its sweetness.
</p>

<p>
There is no need to go into further details. Special
books give us all the data. That which is of interest
is the impersonal fact that what was the <emph>strength</emph>
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>
and <emph>power</emph> of Germany is the best possible illustration
we have had of what science and a sort of mathematical
philosophy are able to accomplish, even
when directed, not to the welfare of Humanity, but
to that of a relatively small group of people. The
above-cited political philosophies had a very pronounced
effect upon Marx. One of the branches of
socialism is the so-called state socialism. State socialists,
as the name indicates, believe that the state should
assume the most important functions in society. It
is obvious that in monarchical countries where <q>god-given</q>
rulers represent the state, such a theory is not
unwelcome, as it gives the rulers an opportunity to
show a sort of <q>advanced liberalism,</q> which serves
to strengthen their power. The astute Bismarck can
not be suspected of being a progressionist in the
modern sense but, being a product of German culture
and philosophy, all his ideals were those of a strong
state. He was a proclaimed advocate of state socialism.
Since 1879 at least, Bismarck was considered
almost the leading spirit of paternal state socialism.
He was a believer and promoter of the close relation
of the state and the railways, keeping always
in view a thorough nationalization which he finally
accomplished. This fact eliminated from German
public life all that phase of corruption which private
ownership of railroads brings in any country, the
railroad being the very life of any country.
</p>

<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>

<p>
To sum up: Germany applied the most scientific
methods to build up her national power; she understood
the elements of <q>power,</q> for they were disclosed
to her by her science and her philosophy. She
applied technological methods in every part of her
civil life, and thus built her gigantic power. Her
industrial life followed the military way; her military
strength was built on industrial power. And
so the vicious circle. Germany adopted a <emph>collective</emph>
aim instead of a personal individualistic aim, and
because of this broader aim, she was able to mobilize
and to keep mobilized all her moral, political and
industrial forces for long years before the war. The
direct effect of this system of continuous mobilization
was over-production. For this she desperately
needed new markets. The cheapest and quickest way
to acquire them, if they were not to be grabbed otherwise,
was to conquer them by a victorious war. Her
plans progressed according to the program, all except
the victory in the battle fields.
</p>

<p>
This war was a calamity of unprecedented magnitude
for the world and it is our duty to study it
dispassionately and learn the lesson of it, if we do
not want to be moral accomplices of this great modern
crime, by letting the world drift into an even
worse catastrophe. We have to arouse ourselves
from our inertia and go to the bottom of this problem
and analyse it ruthlessly, no matter whether the
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>
analysis be pleasant or not. We must value everyone
of our <q>ten sacred dead</q> at least as much as
we value one rabbit killed in scientific laboratories,
and take the lesson to heart or be prepared for a
repetition of world slaughter.
</p>

<p>
If Human Engineering had been established long
ago our social system would have been different, our
civilization would have been much higher, this war
would have been avoided. We do not need to delude
ourselves. The World War was the result of badly
balanced social and economic forces. The world
needs other <q>balances of power</q> than such as are
devised by lawyers and politicians, by single-selfish
or group-selfish interests. Humanity is reaching out
for a science and art of human guidance based upon
a right understanding of human nature.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter IX. Manhood Of Humanity"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter IX. Manhood Of Humanity"/>
<head>Chapter IX. Manhood Of Humanity</head>

<p>
In a previous chapter I have said that the World
War marks the end of one vast period in the
life of humankind and marks the beginning of
another. It marks the end of Humanity's Childhood
and the beginning of Humanity's Manhood.
</p>

<p>
Our human Past is a mighty fact of our world.
Many facts are unstable, impermanent, and evanescent&mdash;they
are here to-day, and to-morrow they
are gone. Not so with the great fact of our human
Past. Our past abides.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>It is permanent. It can be counted on. It is nearly
eternal as the race of man. Out of that past we have come.
Into it we are constantly returning. Meanwhile, it is of
the utmost importance to our lives. It contains the <emph>roots</emph>
of all we are, and of all we have of wisdom, of science, of
philosophy, of art, of jurisprudence, of customs and institutions.
It contains the record or ruins of all the experiments
that man has made during a quarter or a half million
years in the art of living in this world.</q> (Keyser, <hi rend='italic'>Human
Worth of Rigorous Thinking</hi>.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
In our relation to the past there are three wide-open
ways in which one may be a fool. One of the
ways is the way of ignoring the past&mdash;the way of
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>
remaining blankly ignorant of the human past as the
animals are blankly ignorant of <emph>their</emph> past and so of
drifting through life as animals do, without reference
to the experience of bygone generations. Fools
of this type may be called drifting fools or Drifters.
Another way to be a fool&mdash;a very alluring way&mdash;is
that of falsifying the past by <emph>idealizing</emph> it&mdash;by stupidly
disregarding its vices, misery, ignorance, slothfulness,
and folly, and stupidly magnifying its virtues,
happiness, knowledge, achievements and wisdom;
it is the way of the self-complacent&mdash;the way
of those who, being comfortably situated and prosperous,
are opposed to change; the past, they say,
was wise for it produced the present and the present
is good&mdash;let us alone. Fools of this type may be
called idolatrous fools, worshiping the Past; or static
fools, contented with the Present; or cowardly fools,
opposed to change, fearful of the Future. A third
way to be a fool&mdash;which is also alluring&mdash;is the opposite
of the foregoing; it is the way of those who
falsify the past by stupidly and contemptuously disregarding
its virtues, its happiness, its knowledge,
its great achievements, and its wisdom, and by stupidly
or dishonestly magnifying its vices, its misery,
its ignorance, its great slothfulness, and its folly;
it is apt to be the way of the woeful, the unprosperous,
the desperate&mdash;especially the way of such as
find escape from the bore of routine life in the excitements
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>
of unrest, turbulence, and change; the past,
they say, was all wrong, for it produced the present
and the present is thoroughly bad&mdash;let us destroy it,
root and branch. Fools of this type may be called
scorning fools, Scorners of the Past; or destroying
fools, Destroyers of the Present; or dynamic fools,
Revelers in the excitements of Change.
</p>

<p>
Such are the children of folly: (1) Drifting fools&mdash;ignorers
of the past&mdash;disregarders of race experience&mdash;thoughtless
floaters on the shifting currents
of human affairs; (2) Static fools&mdash;idealizers of the
past&mdash;complacent lovers of the present&mdash;enemies of
change&mdash;fearful of the future; (3) Dynamic fools&mdash;scorners
of the past&mdash;haters of the present&mdash;destroyers
of the works of the dead&mdash;most <emph>modest</emph> of
fools, each of them saying: <q>What ought to be begins
with <emph>Me</emph>; I will make the world a paradise; but my
genius must be free; <emph>now</emph> it is hampered by the existing
<q>order</q>&mdash;the bungling work of the past; I will
destroy it; I will start with chaos; we need light&mdash;the
Sun casts shadows&mdash;I will begin by blotting out
the Sun; then the world will be full of glory&mdash;the
light of my genius.</q>
</p>

<p>
In striking contrast with that three-fold division
of Folly, the counsel of Wisdom is one, and it is
one with the sober counsel of Common Sense. What
is that counsel? What is the united counsel of wisdom
and common sense respecting the past? The
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>
answer is easy and easy to understand. The counsel
is this: Do not ignore the past but study it&mdash;study
it diligently as being the mightiest factor among the
great factors of our human world; endeavor to view
the past justly, to contemplate it as it was and is,
to see it <emph>whole</emph>&mdash;to see it in true perspective&mdash;magnifying
neither its good nor its evil, neither its
knowledge nor its ignorance, neither its enterprise
nor its slothfulness, neither its achievements nor its
failures; as the salient facts are ascertained, endeavor
to account for them, to find their causes, their favoring
conditions, to explain the facts to understand
them, applying always the question <emph>Why?</emph> Centuries
of centuries of cruel superstition&mdash;Why? Centuries
of centuries of almost complete ignorance of natural
law&mdash;Why? Centuries of centuries of monstrous
misconceptions of human nature&mdash;Why?
Measureless creations, wastings and destructions of
wealth&mdash;Why? Endless rolling cycles of enterprise,
stagnation, and decay&mdash;Why? Interminable alterations
of peace and war, enslavements and emancipations&mdash;Why?
Age after age of world-wide worship
of man-made gods, silly, savage, enthroned by myth
and magic, celebrated and supported by poetry and
the wayward speculations of ignorant "sages"&mdash;Why?
Age upon age of world-wide slow developments
of useful inventions, craftsmanship, commerce,
and art&mdash;Why? Ages of dark impulsive groping
<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>
before the slow discovery of reason, followed by centuries
of belief in the sufficiency of ratiocination unaided
by systematic observation and experiment&mdash;Why?
At length the dawn of scientific method and
science, the growth of natural knowledge, immeasurable
expansion of the universe <emph>in Time</emph> and <emph>in
Space</emph>, belief in the lawfulness of Nature, rapidly
increasing subjugation of natural forces to human
control, growing faith in the limitless progressibility
of human knowledge and in the limitless perfectibility
of human welfare&mdash;Why? The widely diverse
peoples of the world constrained by scientific progress
to live together as in one community upon a
greatly shrunken and rapidly shrinking planet, the
unpreparedness of existing ethics, law, philosophy,
economics, politics and government to meet the
exigencies thus arising&mdash;Why?
</p>

<p>
Such I take to be the counsel of wisdom&mdash;the simple
wisdom of sober common sense. To ascertain
the salient facts of our immense human past and then
to explain them in terms of their causes and conditions
is not an easy task. It is an exceedingly difficult
one, requiring the labor of many men, of many
generations; but it must be performed; for it is only
in proportion as we learn to know the great facts
of our human past and their causes that we are
enabled to understand our human present, for the
present is the child of the past; and it is only in proportion
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>
as we thus learn to understand the present
that we can face the future with confidence and competence.
Past, Present, Future&mdash;these can not be
understood singly and separately&mdash;they are welded
together indissolubly as <emph>one</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The period of humanity's childhood has been long&mdash;300,000
to 500,000 years, according to the witness
of human relics, ruins and records of the caves and
the rocks&mdash;a stretch of time too vast for our imaginations
to grasp. Of that immense succession of
ages, except a minute fraction of it including our own
time, we have, properly speaking, no history; we
have only a rude, dim, broken outline. Herodotus,
whom we call <q>the father of history</q> proper, lived
less than 2500 years ago. What is 2500 years compared
with the whole backward stretch of human
time? We have to say that the father of human
history lived but yesterday&mdash;a virtual contemporary
of those now living. Our humankind groped upon
this globe for probably 400,000 years before the
writing of what we call history had even begun. If
we regard history as a kind of <emph>racial memory</emph>, what
must we say of our race's memory? It is like that
of a man of 20 years whose recollection extends
back less than 3 months or like that of a man of 60
years whose recollection fails to reach any event
of the first 59 years of his life. Owing to the work
of geologists, paleontologists, ethnologists and their
<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>
co-workers, the history of prehistoric man will grow,
just as we know to-day more about the life of mankind
in the time of Herodotus than Herodotus himself
knew. Meanwhile we must try to make the best
use of such historical knowledge of man as we now
possess.
</p>

<p>
Even if the story of humanity's childhood were
fully recorded in the libraries of the world, it would
not be possible in this brief writing to recount the
story in even the most summary fashion. Except the
tale of recent years, the story is known as I have
said, only in outline, rude, dim and broken, but for
the present purpose this will suffice. Countless multitudes
of details are lost&mdash;most of them doubtless
forever. But we need not despair. The really great
facts of our racial childhood&mdash;the massive, dominant,
outstanding facts&mdash;are sufficiently clear for our
guidance in the present enterprise. And what do we
know?
</p>

<p>
We know that the period of our human childhood
has been inconceivably long; we know that in
the far distant time, the first specimens of humankind&mdash;the
initial members of the time-binding race
of man&mdash;were absolutely without human knowledge
of the hostile world in which they found themselves;
we know that they had no conception of what they
themselves were; we know that they had neither
speech nor art nor philosophy nor religion nor science
<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>
nor tools nor human history nor human tradition;
we know, though we to-day can hardly imagine
it, that their <emph>sole</emph> equipment for <emph>initiating</emph> the career
of the human race was that peculiar faculty which
made them human&mdash;the capacity of man for binding
time; we know that they actually did that work of
initiation, without any guidance or example, maxim
or precedent; and we know that they were able to do
it just because the power of initiation&mdash;the power to
originate&mdash;is a time-binding power.
</p>

<p>
What else do we know of the earliest part of
humanity's childhood? We know that in that far-distant
age, our ancestors&mdash;being, not animals, but
human creatures&mdash;not only <emph>began</emph> to live in the
human dimension of life&mdash;forever above the level of
animals&mdash;but <emph>continued</emph> therein, taking not only the
first step, but the second, the third, and so on indefinitely;
we know, in other words, that they were
progressive creatures, that they made advancement;
we know that their progress was <emph>natural</emph> to them&mdash;as
natural as swimming is to fishes or as flying is to
birds&mdash;for both the impulse and the ability to progress&mdash;to
make improvement&mdash;to do greater things
by help of things already done&mdash;are of the very
nature of the time-binding capacity which makes
humans human.
</p>

<p>
We know that time-binding capacity&mdash;the capacity
for accumulating racial experience, enlarging it,
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>
and transmitting it for future expansion&mdash;is the
peculiar power, the characteristic energy, the definitive
nature, the defining mark, of man; we know
that the mental power, the time-binding capacity,
of our pre-historic ancestors, was the same in <emph>kind</emph>
as our own, if not in degree; we know that it is
natural for this capacity, the highest known agency
of Nature, to produce ideas, inventions, insights,
doctrines, knowledge and other forms of wealth;
we know that progress in what we call civilization,
which is nothing but progress in the production and
right use of material and spiritual wealth, has been
possible and actual simply and solely because the
products of time-binding work not only <emph>survive</emph>, but
naturally tend to propagate their kind&mdash;ideas
begetting ideas, inventions leading to other inventions,
knowledge breeding knowledge; we therefore,
know that the amount of progress which a single
generation can make, if it have an adequate supply
of raw material and be unhampered by hostile circumstances,
depends, not only upon its native
capacity for binding time, but also&mdash;and this is of
the utmost importance&mdash;upon the total progress
made by preceding generations&mdash;upon the inherited
fruit, that is, of the time-binding toil of the dead;
accordingly we know that the amount of progress a
single generation can thus make is what mathematicians
call an increasing function of time, and not
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>
only an increasing function but an increasing <emph>exponential</emph>
function of time&mdash;a function like
<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>, as
already explained; we know, too, that the <emph>total</emph>
progress which <hi rend='italic'>T</hi> successive generations can thus
make is:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>R/R-1</hi>(<hi rend='italic'>PR<hi
rend="vertical-align: super">T-P</hi></hi>)
</p>

<p>
which is also an increasing exponential function of
time; we know from the differential calculus that
these functions&mdash;which represent natural laws, laws
of human <emph>nature</emph>, laws of the time-binding energies
of man&mdash;are very remarkable functions&mdash;not only do
they increase with time but their <emph>rates</emph> of increase
are also exponential functions of time and so the
rates of increase themselves increase at rates which
are, again, exponential functions, and so on and on
without limit; that, I say, is a marvelous fact, and
it is for us a fact of immeasurable significance; for
it means that the time-binding power of man is such
that, if it be allowed to operate naturally, civilization&mdash;the
production and right use of material and
spiritual wealth&mdash;will not only grow towards infinity
(as mathematicians say), but will thus grow with
a <emph>swiftness</emph> which is not constant but which itself
grows towards infinity with a swiftness which, again,
is not constant but increases according to the same
law, and so on indefinitely. We thus see, if we will
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>
only retire to our cloisters and contemplate it, that
the proper life of man <emph>as man</emph> is not life-in-space
like that of animals, but is life-in-time; we thus see
that in distinctively human life, in the life of man
as man, the past is present and the dead survive
destined to greet and to bless the unborn generations:
time, bound-up time, is literally of the core
and substance of civilization. So it has been since
the beginning of man.
</p>

<p>
We know that the total progress made in the long
course of humanity's childhood, though it is absolutely
great, is relatively small; we know that, compared
with no-civilization, our present civilization is
vast and rich in many ways; we know, however, that,
if the time-binding energies of humanity had been
always permitted to operate unhampered by hostile
circumstances, they would long ere now have produced
a state of civilization compared with which
our present estate would seem mean, meagre, savage.
For we know that those peculiar energies&mdash;the civilization-producing
energies of man&mdash;far from being
always permitted to operate according to the laws
of their nature, have <emph>never</emph> been permitted so to
operate, but have always been hampered and are
hampered to-day by hostile circumstances. And, if
we reflect, we may know well enough what the
enemies&mdash;the hostile circumstances&mdash;have been and
are. We know that in the beginning of humanity's
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>
childhood&mdash;in its babyhood, so to speak&mdash;there was,
as already said, no <emph>capital</emph> whatever to start with&mdash;no
material wealth&mdash;no spiritual wealth in the form
of knowledge of the world or the nature of man&mdash;no
existing fruit of dead men's toil&mdash;no bound-up
time&mdash;nothing but wild and raw material, whose
very location, properties and potencies had all to be
discovered; even now, because we have inherited so
much bound-up time and because our imaginations
have been so little disciplined to understand realities,
we can scarcely picture to ourselves the actual conditions
of that far-off time of humanity's babyhood;
still less do we realize that present civilization has
hardly begun to be that of enlightened men. We
know, moreover, that the time-binding energies of
our remote ancestors were hampered and baulked,
in a measure too vast for our imaginations, by immense
geologic and climatic changes, both sudden
and secular, unforeseen and irresistible&mdash;by earthquake
and storm, by age-long seasons of flood and
frost and heat and drought, not only destroying both
natural resources and the slowly accumulated products
of by-gone generations but often extinguishing
the people themselves with the centers and abodes of
struggling civilization.
</p>

<p>
Of all the hostile circumstances, of all the causes
which throughout the long period of humanity's
childhood have operated to keep civilization and
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>
human welfare from progressing in full accord with
the natural laws of the time-binding energies of man,
the most potent cause and most disastrous, a cause
still everywhere in operation, remains to be mentioned.
I mean human ignorance. I do not mean
ignorance of physical facts and the laws of physical
nature for this latter ignorance is in large measure
the effect of the cause I have in mind. The ignorance
I mean is far more fundamental and far more
potent. I mean human ignorance of <emph>Human Nature</emph>&mdash;I
mean man's ignorance of what Man is&mdash;I mean
false conceptions of the rightful place of man in the
scheme of life and the order of the world. What
the false conceptions are I have already pointed out.
They are two. One of them is the conception according
to which human beings are animals. The other
one is the conception according to which human
beings have no place in Nature but are hybrids of
natural and <emph>super</emph>natural, animals combined with
something <q>divine.</q> Both of them are characteristic
of humanity's childhood; both of them are erroneous,
and both of them have done infinite harm in
a thousand ways. Whose is the fault? In a deep
sense, it is the fault of none. Man started with no
capital&mdash;on knowledge&mdash;with nothing but his physical
strength and the natural stirring within of the
capacity for binding time; and so he had to grope.
It is not strange that he was puzzled by himself. It
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>
is not strange that he thought himself an animal;
for he has animal propensities as a cube has surfaces,
and his animal propensities were so obtrusive,
so very evident to physical sense&mdash;he was born, grew,
had legs and hair, ate, ran, slept, died&mdash;all just like
animals&mdash;while his distinctive mark, his time-binding
capacity, was subtle; it was spiritual; it was not a
<emph>visible organ</emph> but an <emph>invisible function</emph>; it was the
energy called intellect or mind, which the physical
senses do not perceive; and so I say it is not strange&mdash;it
is indeed very sad and very pathetic&mdash;but it is
not to be wondered at that human beings have falsely
believed themselves to be animals. So, too, of the
rival belief&mdash;the belief that humans are neither natural
nor supernatural but are both at once, at once
brutal and divine, hybrid offspring of beast and god.
The belief is monstrous, it is very pathetic and very
sad, but its origin is easy to understand; once invented,
it became a powerful instrument for evil men,
for impostors, but it was not invented by them; it
was only an erroneous result of an honest effort to
understand and to explain. For the obvious facts
created a real puzzle to be explained: On the one
hand, men, women and children&mdash;animal-hunting
and animal-hunted human beings&mdash;certainly resembled
animals physically in a hundred unmistakable
ways; on the other hand, it became more and
more evident that the same animal-resembling
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>
human beings could do many things which animals
never did and could not do. Here was a puzzle, a
mystery. Time-binding curiosity demanded an explanation.
What was it to be? Natural science had
not yet arisen; critical conception&mdash;conception that
avoids the mixing of dimensions&mdash;was in the state of
feeble infancy. It is easy to understand what the
answer had to be&mdash;childish and mythical; and so it
was&mdash;humans are neither animals nor gods, neither
natural nor <emph>super</emph>natural, they are both at once, a
mixture, a mysterious union of animal with something
<q>divine.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such, then, are the two rival answers which, in the
long dark, groping course of humanity's childhood,
human beings have given to the most important of
all questions&mdash;the question: What is Man? I have
said that the answers, no matter how sincere, no
matter how honestly arrived at, are erroneous, false
to fact, and monstrous. I have said, and I repeat,
that the misconceptions involved in them have done
more throughout the by-gone centuries, and are
doing more to-day, than all other hindering causes,
to hamper and thwart the <emph>natural</emph> activity of the
time-binding energies of man and thus to retard the
<emph>natural</emph> progress of civilization. It is not merely
our privilege, it is our high and solemn duty, to
examine them. To perform the great duty is not an
easy task. The misconceptions in question have come
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>
down to us from remote antiquity; they have not
come down singly, separately, clean-cut, clear and
well-defined; they have come <emph>entangled</emph> in the complicated
mesh of traditional opinions and creeds that
constitute the vulgar <q>philosophy</q>&mdash;the mental fog&mdash;of
our time. If we are to perform the duty of
examining them we have first of all to draw them
forth, to disengage them from our inherited tangle
of beliefs and frame them in suitable words; we have
next to bring ourselves to realize vividly and keenly
that the conceptions, thus disentangled and framed,
are in fact, whether they be true or false, at the
very heart of the social philosophy of the world;
we have in the third place to detect the fundamental
character of the blunder involved in them&mdash;to see
clearly and coldly wherein they are wrong and why
they are ruinous; we have, finally, to trace, if we can,
their deadly effects both in the course of human
history and in the present status of our human world.
</p>

<p>
The task of disengaging the two monstrous misconceptions
from the tangled skein of inherited beliefs
and framing them in words, I have already
repeatedly performed. Let us keep the results in
mind. Here they are in their nakedness: (1)
Human beings&mdash;men, women, and children&mdash;are
animals (and so they are natural): (2) human
beings are neither natural nor <emph>super</emph>natural, neither
wholly animal nor wholly <q>divine,</q> but are <emph>both</emph>
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>
natural and <emph>super</emph>natural <emph>at once</emph>&mdash;a sort of mysterious
hybrid compound of brute and gods.
</p>

<p>
The second part of our task&mdash;which is the reader's
task as much as mine&mdash;is not so easy; and the reason
is evident. It is this: The false creeds in question&mdash;the
fatal misconceptions they involve&mdash;are so
<emph>familiar</emph> to us&mdash;they have been so long and so deeply
imbedded in our thought and speech and ways of
life&mdash;we have been so thoroughly <emph>bred</emph> in them by
home and school and church and state&mdash;that we
<emph>habitually</emph> and <emph>unconsciously</emph> take them for granted
and have to be virtually <emph>stung</emph> into an awareness of
the fact that we do actually hold them and that they
do actually reign to-day throughout the world and
have so reigned from time immemorial. We have,
therefore, to shake ourselves awake, to <emph>prick</emph> ourselves
into a realization of the truth.
</p>

<p>
I assume that the reader is at once hard-headed,
rational, I mean, and interested in the welfare of
mankind. If he is not, he will not be a <q>reader</q>
of this book. He, therefore, knows that the third
task&mdash;the task of detecting and exposing the fundamental
error of the misconceptions in question&mdash;is
a task of the utmost importance. What is that error?
It is, I have said, an error in logic. But logical
errors are not all alike&mdash;they are of many kinds.
What is the <q>kind</q> of <emph>this</emph> one? It is the kind that
consists in what mathematicians call <q>confusion of
<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>
types,</q> or <q>mixing of dimensions.</q> The answer can
not be made too clear nor too emphatic, for its importance
in the criticism of <emph>all</emph> our thinking is great
beyond measure. There are millions of examples
that help to make the matter clear. I will again
employ the simplest of them&mdash;one so simple that a
child can understand it. It is a mathematical example,
as it ought to be, for the whole question of
logical types, or dimensions, is a mathematical one.
I beg the reader not to shy at, or run away from,
the mere word mathematical, for, although most of
us have but little mathematical <emph>knowledge</emph>, we all of
us have the mathematical <emph>spirit</emph>, for else we should
not be human&mdash;we are all of us mathematicians <emph>at
heart</emph>. Let us, then, proceed confidently and at once
to our simple example. Here is a <emph>surface</emph>, say a
<emph>plane</emph> surface. It has length and breadth&mdash;and so
it has, we say, <emph>two</emph> dimensions; next consider a <emph>solid</emph>,
say a <emph>cube</emph>. It has length, breadth and thickness&mdash;and
so <emph>it</emph> has, we say, <emph>three</emph> dimensions. Now we
notice that the cube <emph>has</emph> surfaces and so <emph>has certain
surface properties</emph>. Do we, therefore, say that a
solid <emph>is</emph> a surface? That the cube is a member of
the class of surfaces? If we did, we should be fools&mdash;type-confusing
fools&mdash;dimension-mixing fools.
That is evident. Or suppose we notice that solids
have certain <emph>surface</emph> properties and certain properties
that surfaces do <emph>not</emph> have; and suppose we say
<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>
the <emph>surface</emph> properties of solids are <emph>natural</emph> but the
other properties are so mysterious that they must
be <q><emph>super</emph>natural</q> or somehow <q>divine</q>; and suppose
we then say that solids are unions, mixtures,
compounds or hybrids of surfaces and something
divine or <emph>super</emph>natural; is it not evident that, if we
did that, we should be again blundering like fools?
Type-confusing fools? Dimension-mixing fools?
That such would be the case any one can see. Let
us now consider animals and human beings, and let
us look squarely and candidly at the facts. To get
a start, think for a moment of plants. Plants are
living things; they take, transform and appropriate
the energies of sun, soil, and air, but they have <emph>not</emph>
the <emph>autonomous</emph> power to move about in space; we
may say that plants constitute the lowest order or
class or type or dimension of life&mdash;the dimension
<emph>one</emph>; plants, we see are binders of the <emph>basic</emph> energies
of the world. What of animals? Like the plants,
animals, too, take in, transform and appropriate the
energies of sun, soil and air, though in large part
they take them in forms already prepared by the
plants themselves; but, <emph>unlike</emph> the plants, animals
possess the <emph>autonomous</emph> power to move about in
space&mdash;to creep or crawl or run or swim or fly&mdash;it
is thus evident that, compared with plants, animals
belong to a higher order, or higher class, or higher
type, or higher dimension of life; we may therefore
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>
say that the type of animal life is a type of <emph>two</emph>
dimensions&mdash;a two-dimensional type; I have called
them space-binders because they are distinguished, or
marked, by their autonomous power to move about
in space, to abandon one place and occupy another
and so to appropriate the natural fruits of many
localities; the life of animals is thus a life-in-space
in a sense evidently not applicable to plants. And
now what shall we say of <emph>Man</emph>? Like the animals,
human beings have indeed the power of mobility&mdash;the
autonomous power to move&mdash;the capacity for
binding space, and it is obvious that, if they possessed
no capacity of higher order, men, women and
children would indeed be animals. But what are
the facts? The facts, if we will but note them and
reflect upon them, are such as to show us that the
chasm separating human nature from animal nature
is even wider and deeper than the chasm between
animal life and the life of plants. For man improves,
animals do not; man progresses, animals do
not; man invents more and more complicated tools,
animals do not; man is a creator of material and
spiritual wealth, animals are not; man is a builder
of civilization, animals are not; man makes the <emph>past
live in the present and the present in the future</emph>,
animals do not; man is thus a <emph>binder of time</emph>, animals
are not. In the light of such considerations, if
only we will attend to their mighty significance, it
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>
is as clear as anything can be or can become, that
the life of man&mdash;the time-binder&mdash;is as radically distinct
from that of animals&mdash;mere space-binders&mdash;as
animal life is distinct from that of plants or
as the nature of a solid is distinct from that of
a surface, or that of a surface from that of a line.
It is, therefore, perfectly manifest that, when we regard
human beings as animals or as mixtures of animal
nature with something mysteriously <emph>super</emph>natural,
we are guilty of the same <emph>kind</emph> of blunder as if we
regarded animals as plants or as plants touched by
<q>divinity</q>&mdash;the same <emph>kind</emph> of blunder as that of regarding
a solid as a surface or as a surface miraculously
transfigured by some mysterious influence from
outside the universe of space. It is thus evident that
our guilt in the matter is the guilt of a blunder that
is <emph>fundamental</emph>&mdash;a confusing of types, a mixing of
dimensions.
</p>

<p>
Nothing can be more disastrous. For what are
the consequences of that kind of error? Let the
reader reflect. He knows that, if our ancestors had
committed that kind of error regarding lines and
surfaces and solids, there would to-day be no science
of geometry; and he knows that, if there were no
geometry, there would be no architecture in the
world, no surveying, no railroads, no astronomy, no
charting of the seas, no steamships, no engineering,
nothing whatever of the now familiar world-wide
<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>
affairs made possible by the scientific conquest of
space. I say again, let the reader reflect; for if he
does not, he will here miss the gravity of a most
momentous truth. He readily sees, in the case supposed,
how very appalling the consequences would
have been if, throughout the period of humanity's
childhood, there had occurred a certain confusion
of types, a certain mixing of dimensions, and he is
<emph>enabled</emph> to see it just because, happily, the blunder
was <emph>not</emph> made or, if made, was not persisted in, for,
if it had been made and persisted in, then the great
and now familiar things of which it would have deprived
the world would not be here; we should not
now be able even to imagine them, and so we could
not now compute even roughly the tremendous magnitude
of the blunder's disastrous consequences. Let
the reader not deviate nor falter nor stagger here;
let him shoulder the burden of the mighty argument
and bear it to the goal. He easily perceives the truly
appalling consequences that <emph>would</emph> have inevitably
followed from the error of confusing types&mdash;the
error of mixing dimensions&mdash;in the matter of lines
and surfaces and solids, <emph>if</emph> that error had been
committed and persisted in throughout the centuries;
he <emph>can</emph> perceive those consequences just
because the error was <emph>not</emph> made and hence the
great things of which (had the blunder been made)
it would have deprived the world are here, so that
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>
he can say: <q>Behold those splendid things&mdash;the
science of geometry and its manifold applications
everywhere shining in human affairs&mdash;imagine all of
them gone, imagine the world if they had never been,
and you will have a measure of the consequences that
would have followed violation of the law of types,
the law of dimensions, in the matter of lines, surfaces
and solids.</q> But, now, in regard to the exactly similar
error respecting the nature of man, the situation
is reversed; for this blunder, unlike the other one,
is not merely hypothetical; we have seen that it was
actually committed and has been actually persisted in
from time immemorial; not merely for years or for
decades or for centuries but for <emph>centuries</emph> of <emph>centuries</emph>
including our own day, it has lain athwart the course
of human progress; age after age it has hampered
and baulked the natural activity of the time-binding
energies&mdash;the civilization-producing energies&mdash;of
humanity. How are we to estimate its consequences?
Let the reader keep in mind that the error is fundamental&mdash;a
type-confusing blunder (like that supposed
regarding geometric entities); let him reflect,
moreover, that it affects, not merely one of our human
concerns, but <emph>all</emph> of them, since it is an error regarding
the <emph>center</emph> of them all&mdash;regarding the very <emph>nature</emph>
of man himself; and he will know, as well as anything
can be known, that the consequences of the
ages-old blunder have been and are very momentous
<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>
and very terrible. Their measure is indeed beyond
our power; we cannot describe them adequately, we
cannot delineate their proportions, for we cannot
truly imagine them; and the reason is plain: it is that
those advancements of civilization, those augmentations
of material and spiritual wealth, all of the
glorious achievements of which the tragic blunder
has deprived the world, are none of them here; they
have not been produced; and so we cannot say, as in
the other case: <q>Look upon these splendid treasures
of bound-up time, imagine them taken away, and
your sense of the appalling loss will give you the
measure required.</q> It is evident that the glories of
which the misconceptions of human nature have deprived
manhood must long remain, perhaps forever,
in the sad realm of dreams regarding great and noble
things that might have been.
</p>

<p>
I have said that the duty of examining the misconceptions
imposes upon us four obligations. Three
of these we have performed: we have disengaged the
beliefs in question from the complicated tangle of
opinions in which they have come down to us from
remote antiquity; we have recognized the necessity
and the duty of virtually stinging ourselves into an
awareness of the fact that we have actually held
them for true and that from time immemorial they
have poured their virus into the heart of ethics, economics,
politics and government throughout the
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>
world; we have seen not only that the beliefs are
false but that their falseness is due to a blunder of
the most fundamental kind&mdash;the blunder of mixing
dimensions or confusing types. As already said, the
fourth one of the mentioned tasks is that of tracing,
if we can, the blunder's deadly effects both in human
history and in the present status of the world. We
have just reached the conclusion that this task cannot
be <emph>fully</emph> performed; for there can be no doubt,
as we have seen, that, if the blunder had not been
committed and persisted in, the world would now
possess a civilization so far advanced, so rich in the
spiritual fruits of time and toil, as to be utterly
beyond our present power to conceive or imagine it.
</p>

<p>
But, though we cannot perform the task fully, our
plight is far from hopeless. The World War has
goaded us into thinking as we never thought before.
It has constrained us to think of realities and especially
to think of the supreme reality&mdash;the reality
of Man. That is why the great Catastrophe marks
the close of humanity's childhood. The period has
been long and the manner of its end is memorable
forever&mdash;a sudden, flaming, world-wide cataclysmic
demonstration of fundamental ignorance&mdash;human
ignorance of human nature. It is just that tragic
<emph>demonstration</emph>, brutal as an earthquake, pitiless as
fate or famine, that gives us ground for future hope.
It has forced us to think of realities and it is thought
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>
of reality that will heal the world. And so I say
that these days, despite their fear and gloom, are the
beginning of a new order in human affairs&mdash;the order
of permanent peace and swift advancement of human
weal. For we know at length what human beings
are, and the knowledge can be taught to men and
women and children by home and school and church
and press throughout the world; we know at length,
and we can teach the world, that man is neither an
animal nor a miraculous mixture of angel and beast;
we know at length, and we can teach, that, throughout
the centuries, these monstrous misconceptions
have made countless millions mourn and that they
are doing so to-day, for, though we cannot compute
the <emph>good</emph> of which they have <emph>deprived</emph> mankind,
we can trace the dark ramifications of their positive
<emph>evil</emph> in a thousand ways; we know at length, and we
can teach, that man, though he is not an animal,
is a natural being, having a definite place, a rank
of his own, in the hierarchy of natural life; we know
at length, and we can teach the world, that what
is <emph>characteristic</emph> of the human class of life&mdash;that
which makes us <emph>human</emph>&mdash;is the power to create
material and spiritual wealth&mdash;to beget the light of
reasoned understanding&mdash;to produce civilization&mdash;it
is the unique capacity of man for binding time, uniting
past, present and future in a <emph>single growing
reality</emph> charged at once with the surviving creations
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>
of the dead, with the productive labor of the living,
with the rights and hopes of the yet unborn; we
know at length, and we can teach, that the <emph>natural</emph>
rate of human progress is the rate of a swiftly increasing
exponential function of time; we know, and
we can teach, that what is good in <emph>present</emph> civilization&mdash;all
that is precious in it, sacred and holy&mdash;is
the fruit of the time-binding toil struggling blindly
through the ages against the perpetual barrier of
human ignorance of human nature; we know at
length, we can teach, and the world will understand,
that in proportion as we rid our ethics and social
philosophy of monstrous misrepresentations of
human nature, the time-binding energies of humanity
will advance civilization in accordance with their
natural law <hi rend='italic'>PR<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>,
the forward-leaping function of time.
</p>

<p>
Such knowledge and such teaching will inaugurate
the period of humanity's manhood. It can be made
an endless period of rapid developments in True
civilization. All the developments must grow out
of the true conception of human beings as constituting
the time-binding class of life, and so the work
must begin with a campaign of education wide
enough to embrace the world. The cooperation of
all educational agencies&mdash;the home, the school, the
church, the press&mdash;must be enlisted to make known
the fundamental truth concerning the nature of man
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>
so that it shall become the guiding <emph>light</emph> and <emph>habit</emph>
of men, women, and children everywhere. Gradual
indeed but profound will be the transformations
wrought in all the affairs of mankind, but especially
and first of all in the so-called arts and sciences of
ethics, economics, politics and government.
</p>

<p>
The ethics of humanity's manhood will be neither
<q>animal</q> ethics nor <q><emph>super</emph>natural</q> ethics. It will be
a natural ethics based upon a knowledge of the laws
of human nature. It will not be a branch of zoology,
the ethics of tooth and claw, the ethics of profiteering,
the ethics of space-binding beasts fighting for <q>a
place in the sun.</q> It will be a branch of humanology,
a branch of Human Engineering; it will be a
time-binding ethics, the ethics of the entirely natural
civilization-producing energies of humanity. Whatever
accords with the natural activity of those energies
will be <emph>right</emph> and <emph>good</emph>; whatever does not, will
be <emph>wrong</emph> and <emph>bad</emph>. <q>Survival of the fittest</q> in the
sense of the <emph>strongest</emph> is a space-binding standard,
the ethical standard of beasts; in the ethics of
humanity's manhood survival of the fittest will mean
survival of the <emph>best</emph> in competitions for excellence,
and excellence will mean time-binding excellence&mdash;excellence
in the production and right use of material
and spiritual wealth&mdash;excellence in science, in art, in
wisdom, in justice, in promoting the weal and protecting
the rights both of the living and of the unborn.
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>
The ethics that arose in the dark period of
humanity's childhood from the conception of human
beings as mysterious unions of animality and divinity
gave birth to two repulsive species of traffic&mdash;traffic
in men regarded as animals, fit to be slaves, and
traffic in the <q>supernatural,</q> in the sale of indulgences
in one form or another and the <q>divine wisdom</q>
of ignorant priests. It is needless to say that
in the natural ethics of humanity's manhood those
species of commerce will not be found.
</p>

<p>
And what shall we say in particular of economics,
of <q>industry,</q> <q>business as usual,</q> and the <q>finance</q>
of <q>normalcy</q>? There lies before me an established
handbook of <hi rend='italic'>Corporation Finance</hi>, by Mr. E.
S. Mead, Ph.D. (Appleton, N. Y.), whose purpose
is not that of adverse criticism but is that of showing
the generally accepted <q>sound</q> bases for prosperous
business. I can hardly do better than to ask the
reader to ponder a few extracts from that work,
showing the established, and amazing theories, for
then I have only to say that in the period of humanity's
manhood the moral blindness of such <q>principles,</q>
their space-binding spirit of calculating selfishness
and greed, will be regarded with utter loathing as
slavery is regarded to-day. Behold the picture:
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Since the bondholder is solely interested in the security
of his principal, and regular payment of his interest, and
since both security and interest depend upon the permanence
<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>
of income, other things being equal the companies with the
most stable earnings or a market ... furnish the best
security for bonds. Stability of earnings depends upon (1)
the possession of a monopoly.... <emph>Monopoly is exclusive
or dominant control over a market. The more complete
this control, the more valuable is the monopoly.</emph> The advantage
of monopoly lies in the fact that the prices of services
or commodities are controlled by the producers (<emph>meaning
owners&mdash;Author</emph>), rather than by the consumer.... Monopolies
are of various origins. The most familiar are (1)
franchises, the right to use <emph>public property</emph> for
<emph>private purposes</emph>,
for example, the furnishing of light, water and transportation,
(2) <emph>control of sources of raw material</emph> ... , (3)
patents, ... (4) high cost of duplicating plant.... In
manufacturing industries, for example, those enterprises
which <emph>produce raw materials</emph> and the <emph>necessities of life</emph> have
a more stable demand.... Railroads furnish perhaps the
best basis of bond issue because of the stability of the demand
for the transportation service ... the high cost of duplicating
the railroad plant, ... enables them to fix their
rates on freight and passenger traffic.... The security of
the creditors is here the profitableness of the business <emph>which
is carried on in the factory</emph>. Furthermore, a business is not
an aggregate of physical property but consists of physical
property&mdash;buildings, boilers, machine tools&mdash;plus an industrial
opportunity, plus the organization and ability to operate
business.</q> (Italics indicated by the author.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
There we see the animal standards in their studied
perfection. Comment would be superfluous.
</p>

<p>
In the period of humanity's manhood, the so-called
<q>science</q> of economics, the <q>dismal science</q>
of political economy, will become a genuine science
based upon the laws of the time-binding energies of
<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>
humanity; it will become the light of Human Engineering&mdash;promoter,
guardian, and guide of human
weal. For it will discover, and will teach that a
<emph>human</emph> life, a time-binding life, is not merely a <emph>civilized</emph>
life but a <emph>civilizing</emph> life; it will know and will
teach that a civilizing life is a life devoted to the
production of potential and kinetic use-values&mdash;to the
creation, that is, of material and spiritual wealth;
it will know and will teach that wealth&mdash;both material
and spiritual wealth&mdash;is a natural phenomenon&mdash;offspring
of the marriage of Time and human
Toil; it will know and will teach that the wealth in
the world at any given moment is almost wholly the
<emph>inherited</emph> fruit of time and the labor of the dead;
and so it will ask: To whom does the inheritance
rightly belong? Does it of right belong to Smith
and Brown? If so, <emph>why</emph>? Or does it of right belong
to man&mdash;to humanity? If so, <emph>why</emph>? And what does
<q>humanity</q> include? Only the living, who are relatively
few? Or both the living and unborn? The
Economics of humanity's manhood will not only ask
these questions but it will answer them and answer
them aright. In seeking the answers, it will discover
some obvious truths and many old words will acquire
new meanings consistent with the time-binding nature
of man. It will discover and will teach that the
time-binders of a given generation are <emph>posterity</emph> and
<emph>ancestry</emph> at once&mdash;posterity of the dead, ancestry of
<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>
all the generations to come; it will discover and will
teach that in this time-binding double relationship
uniting past and future in a single living growing
Reality, are to be found the obligations of time-binding
ethics and the seat of its authority; economics
will know and will teach that <emph>human</emph> posterity&mdash;time-binding
posterity&mdash;can not inherit the fruits of
time and dead men's toil <emph>as animals inherit the wild
fruits of the earth, to fight about them and to devour
them</emph>, but only as <emph>trustees</emph> for the generations to
come; it will know and will teach that "capitalistic"
lust to <emph>keep</emph> for <hi rend="sc">self</hi> and
<q>proletarian</q> lust to <emph>get</emph>
for <hi rend="sc">self</hi> are both of them <emph>space-binding</emph> lust&mdash;animal
lust&mdash;beneath the level of time-binding life.
The economics of humanity's manhood will know and
will teach that the characteristic energies of man as
man are by <emph>nature</emph> civilizing energies, wealth-producing
energies, time-binding energies, the peaceful
energies of inventive mind, of growing knowledge
and understanding and skill and light; it will know
and will teach that these energies of existing men
united with one billion six hundred million available
<q>sun-man</q> powers united with the ten billion living
<q>man-powers of the dead,</q> if they be not wasted
by ignorance and selfishness, by conflict and competition
characteristic of beasts, are more than sufficient
to produce a high order of increasing prosperity
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>
everywhere throughout the world; in the
period of its manhood economics will discover and
will teach that to produce world prosperity, cooperation&mdash;not
the fighting of man against man&mdash;but
the peaceful cooperation of all is both <emph>necessary</emph> and
sufficient; it will know and will teach that such cooperation
demands <emph>scientific</emph> leadership and a common
<emph>aim</emph>; it will know, however, and will teach, for the
lesson of Germany is plain, that scientific knowledge
and a common aim are not alone sufficient; it will
know and teach and all will understand that the
common aim, the unifying principle, the basis of cooperation,
cannot be the welfare of a family nor that
of a province or a state or a race, but must be the
welfare of <emph>all</emph> mankind, the prosperity of humanity,
the weal of the world&mdash;the peaceful production of
Wealth without the destruction of War.
</p>

<p>
In humanity's manhood, patriotism&mdash;the love of
country&mdash;will not perish&mdash;far from it&mdash;it will grow
to embrace the world, for your country and mine
will be the world. Your <q>state</q> and mine will be
the Human State&mdash;a Cooperative Commonwealth
of Man&mdash;a democracy in fact and not merely in
name. It will be a natural organic embodiment of
the civilizing energies&mdash;the wealth-producing energies&mdash;characteristic
of the human class of life. Its
larger affairs will be guided by the science and art
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>
of Human Engineering&mdash;not by ignorant and grafting
<q>politicians</q>&mdash;but by scientific men, by honest
men who <emph>know</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Is it a dream? It <emph>is</emph> a dream, but the dream will
come true. It is a scientific dream and science will
make it a living reality.
</p>

<p>
How is the thing to be done? No one can foresee
all the details, but in general outline the process is
clear. Violence is to be avoided. There must be a
period of transition&mdash;a period of adjustment. A
natural first step would probably be the establishment
of a new institution which might be called a
Dynamic Department&mdash;Department of Coordination
or a Department of Cooperation&mdash;the name is
of little importance, but it would be the <emph>nucleus</emph> of
the new civilization. Its functions would be those
of encouraging, helping and protecting the people
in such cooperative enterprises as agriculture, manufactures,
finance, and distribution.
</p>

<p>
The Department of Cooperation should include
various sections, which might be as follows:
</p>

<p>
(1) <hi rend='italic'>The Section of Mathematical Sociology</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>Humanology</hi>: composed of at least one sociologist,
one biologist, one mechanical engineer, and one mathematician.
Their work would be the development
of human engineering and mathematical sociology
or humanology; promoting the progress of science;
providing and supervising instruction in the theory
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>
of values and the rudiments of humanology for elementary
schools and the public at large. <emph>The members
of the section would be selected by the appropriate
scientific societies for a term fixed by the selectors.</emph>
</p>

<p>
(2) <hi rend='italic'>The Section of Mathematical Legislation</hi>:
composed of (say) one lawyer, one mathematician,
one mechanical engineer, selected as above. Their
task would be to recommend legislation, to provide
means for eliminating <q>Legalism</q> from the theory
and practice of law, and to bring jurisprudence into
accord with the laws of time-binding human nature
and the changing needs of human society. Their
legislative proposals, if ratified in a joint session
of sections (1) and (2), would then be recommended
to the appropriate legislative bodies.
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>The Educational Section</hi>: composed of two
or three teachers, one sociologist, one mechanical
engineer, one mathematician, selected as above.
They would elaborate educational projects and revise
school methods and books; their decisions being subject
to the approval of the joint session of sections
(1), (2), and (3).
</p>

<p>
(4) <hi rend='italic'>The Cooperative Section</hi>: composed of
mechanical engineers, chemical engineers, production
engineers, expert bookkeepers, accountants,
business managers, lawyers and other specialists in
their respective lines. This section would be an <q>Industrial
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>
Red Cross</q> (Charles Ferguson) giving expert
advice when asked for by any cooperative
society.
</p>

<p>
(5) <hi rend='italic'>The Cooperative Banking Section</hi>: composed
of financial experts, sociologists, and mathematicians;
its task being to help with expert advice new
cooperative people's banks.
</p>

<p>
(6) <hi rend='italic'>The Promoters' Section</hi>: composed of engineers
whose duty would be to study all of the
latest scientific facts, collect data, and elaborate
plans. Those plans would be published, and no private
person, but only cooperative societies, would be
permitted by law to use them. The department
would also study and give advice respecting the general
conditions of the market and the needs in the
various lines of production. This section would regulate
the duplication of production.
</p>

<p>
(7) <hi rend='italic'>The Farming Section</hi>: composed of specialists
in scientific and cooperative agriculture.
</p>

<p>
(8) <hi rend='italic'>The Foreign Section</hi>: for inter-cooperative
foreign relations.
</p>

<p>
(9) <hi rend='italic'>The Commercial Section</hi>.
</p>

<p>
(10) <hi rend='italic'>The News Section</hi>: to edit a large daily
paper giving <emph>true</emph>, <emph>uncolored</emph> news with a special
supplement relating to progress in the work of
Human Engineering. This paper would give daily
news about the whole cooperative movement, markets,
etc., etc.
</p>

<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>

<p>
All men selected to the places for this work
should be the very best men in the nation. They
should be well paid to enable them to give their full
energy and time to their duties. All the selections
for this work should be made in the same manner
as mentioned above&mdash;through proven merits not
clever oratory. Such appointments should be considered
the highest honor that a country can offer
to its citizens. Every selection should be a demonstration
that the person selected was a person of the
highest attainments in the field of his work.
</p>

<p>
The outline of this plan is vague; it aims merely
at being suggestive. Its principal purpose is to
accentuate the imperative necessity of establishing a
national time-binding agency&mdash;a Dynamic Department
for stimulating, guiding and guarding the
civilizing energies, the wealth producing energies,
the time-binding energies, in virtue of which human
beings are human. For then and only then human
welfare, unretarded by monstrous misconceptions of
human nature, by vicious ethics, vicious economics
and vicious politics, will advance peacefully, continuously,
and rapidly, under the leadership of human
engineering, happily and without fear, in accord with
the exponential law&mdash;the <emph>natural</emph> law&mdash;of the time-binding
energies of Man.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Chapter X. Conclusion"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Chapter X. Conclusion"/>
<head>Chapter X. Conclusion</head>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>In Europe we know that an age is dying. Here it
would be easy to miss the signs of coming changes, but
I have little doubt that it will come. A realization of
the <emph>aimlessness</emph> of life lived to labor and to die, having
achieved nothing but avoidance of starvation, and the
birth of children also doomed to the weary treadmill,
has seized the minds of millions.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sir Auckland Geddes, British Ambassador to the U. S. 1920.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
In conclusion let me say very briefly, as I said in
the beginning, that this little book has aimed to
be only a sketch. The Problem of Life is old. I
have endeavored to approach it afresh, with a new
method, in a new spirit, from a new point of view.
The literature of the subject is vast. It displays
great knowledge and skill. Much of it is fitted to
inform and to inspire such as really read with a
genuine desire to understand. Its weakness is due
to the absence of a true conception of what human
beings are. That is what I miss in it and it is that
lack of fundamental and central thought that I have
striven to supply. If I have succeeded in that, I
have no fear&mdash;all else will follow quickly, inevitably,
as a matter of course. For a fundamental conception,
once it is formed and expressed, has a strange
power&mdash;the power of enlisting the thought and cooperation
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>
of many minds. And no conception can
have greater power in our human world than a <emph>true</emph>
conception of the nature of Man. For that most
important of truths the times are ripe; the world
is filled with the saddest of memories, with gloom,
forebodings and fear. Without the truth in this
matter, there can be no rational hope&mdash;history must
go on in its dismal course; but <emph>with</emph> the truth, there
is not only hope but certitude that the old order has
passed and that humanity's manhood dates from the
present day. That I have here presented the truth
in this matter&mdash;the true conception of the human
class of life&mdash;I have personally no doubt; and I have
no doubt that that conception is to be the base, the
guide, the source of light, of a new civilization.
Whether I am mistaken or not, time will decide. I
feel as Buckle felt in writing his <hi rend='italic'>History of Civilization</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Whether or not I have effected anything of real value ...
is a question for competent judges to decide. Of this, at
least, I feel certain, that whatever imperfections may be
observed, the fault consists, not in the method proposed, but
in the extreme difficulty of any single man putting into full
operation all the parts of so vast a scheme. It is on this
point, and on this alone, that I feel the need of great indulgence.
But, as to the plan itself, I have no misgivings. Of
defects in its execution I am not unconscious. I can only
plead the immensity of the subject, the shortness of a single
life and the imperfection of every single enterprise. I, therefore,
wish this work to be estimated, not according to the
<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>
finish of its separate parts, but according to the way in which
those parts have been fused into a complete and symmetrical
whole. This, in an undertaking of such novelty and magnitude,
I have a right to expect, and I would moreover, add,
that if the reader has met with opinions adverse to his own,
he should remember, that his views are, perhaps, the same
as those which I too once held, and which I have abandoned,
because, after a wider range of study, I found them unsupported
by solid proof, subversive of the interest of Man, and
fatal to the progress of his knowledge. To examine the
notions in which we have been educated, and to turn aside
from those which will not bear the test, is a task so painful,
that they who shrink from the sufferings should pause before
they reproach those by whom the suffering is undergone....
Conclusions arrived at in this way are not to be overturned
by stating that they endanger some other conclusions; nor
can they be even affected by allegation against their supposed
tendency. The principles which I advocate are based upon
distinct arguments supported by well ascertained facts. The
only points, therefore, to be ascertained, are, whether the
arguments are fair, and whether the facts are certain. If
these two conditions have been obeyed, the principles follow
by an inevitable inference.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
And why have I sought throughout to follow the
spirit of mathematics? Because I have been dealing
with ideas and have desired, above all things else,
to be right and clear. Ideas have a character of their
own&mdash;they are right or wrong independently of our
hopes and passions and will. In the connection of
ideas there is an unbreakable thread of destiny. That
is why in his <hi rend='italic'>Mathematical Philosophy</hi> Professor
Keyser has truly said:
</p>

<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Mathematics is the study of Fate&mdash;not fate in a physical
sense, but in the sense of the binding thread that connects
thought with thought and conclusions with their premises.
Where, then, is our freedom? What do you love? Painting?
Poetry? Music? The muses are <emph>their</emph> fates. Whoso
loves them is free. Logic is the muse of Thought.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
No doubt mathematics is truly impersonal in
method; too impersonal maybe to please the sentimentalists
before they take the time to think; mathematical
analysis of life phenomena elevates our
point of view above passion, above selfishness in any
form, and, therefore, it is the only method which can
tell us genuine truths about ourselves. Spinosa even
in the 17th Century had well realized this fact and
although imperfect in many ways, his was an effort in
the right direction and this quoted conclusion may
well be a conclusion for ourselves in the 20th century:
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>The truth might forever have remained hid from the
human race, if mathematics, which looks not to the final cause
of figures, but to their essential nature and the properties
involved in it, had not set another type of knowledge before
them.... When I turned my mind to this subject, I did
not propose to myself any novel or strange aim, but simply
to demonstrate by certain and indubitable reason, those things
which agree best with practice. And in order that I might
enquire into the matters of the science with the same freedom
of mind with which we are wont to treat lines and
surfaces in mathematics; I determined not to laugh or to
weep over the actions of men, but simply to understand them;
and to contemplate their affections and passions, such as love,
hate, anger, envy, arrogance, pity and all other disturbances
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>
of soul not as vices of human nature, but as properties pertaining
to it in the same way as heat, cold, storm, thunder
pertain to the nature of the atmosphere. For these, though
troublesome, are yet necessary, and have certain causes
through which we may come to understand them, and thus,
by contemplating them in their truth, gain for our minds
much joy as by the knowledge of things that are pleasing to
the senses.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
If only this little book will <emph>initiate</emph> the scientific
study of Man, I shall be happy; for then we may
confidently expect a science and art that will know
how to direct the energies of man to the advancement
of human weal.
</p>

<p>
What else? Many topics have not even been
broached. Time-binding energy&mdash;what may it not
achieve in course of the aeons to come? What light
may it not yet throw upon such fundamental phenomena
as <emph>Space</emph>, <emph>Time</emph>, <emph>Infinity</emph>, and so on? What,
if any, are the limits of Time-binding? In it are
somehow involved all the higher functions of mind.
Is Time identical with Intelligence? Is either of
them the other's cause? Is Time <emph>in</emph> the Cosmos or
is the latter in the former? Is the Cosmos intelligent?
Many no doubt and marvelous are the fields
which the scientific study of man will open for
research.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Appendix I. Mathematics And Time-Binding"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Appendix I. Mathematics And Time-Binding"/>
<anchor id="Appendix_I"/>
<head>Appendix I. Mathematics And Time-Binding</head>

<p>
The purpose of this appendix is to give an expression of
some new ideas which evolve directly out of the fact
that humans are time-binders and which may serve as suggestions
for the foundation of <hi rend='italic'>scientific psychology</hi>. The
problem is of exceeding difficulty to give expression to in any
form and therefore much more difficult to express in any
exact or correct form, and so I beg the reader's patience in
regard to the language because some of the ideas are in themselves
correct and sometimes very suggestive in spite of the
language used. I am particularly interested that mathematicians,
physicists and metaphysicians should read it carefully,
forgive me the form, and look into the suggestions, because
scientific psychology if such a science is to exist, would by
necessity have to be a branch of physics. I particularly beg
the mathematicians and physicists not to discard this appendix
with too hasty a judgment of <q>Oh! metaphysics,</q> and also
the metaphysicians not to do the same with an equally hasty
judgment <q>Oh! mathematics.</q> I hope that if this appendix
is sympathetically understood, mathematicians and physicists
will be moved to investigate the problem. If mathematicians
and physicists would be more tolerant toward metaphysics
and if metaphysicians would be moved to study mathematics,
both would find tremendous fields to work in.
</p>

<p>
Some scientists are very pedantic and therefore intolerant
in their pedantry and they may say <q>the fellow should learn
first how to express himself and then ask our attention.</q> My
answer is that the problems involved are too pressing, too
vital, too fundamental for humankind, to permit me to delay
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>
for perhaps long years before I shall be able to present the
subject in a correct and satisfactory form, and also that the
problems involved cover too vast a field for a single man
to work it conclusively. It seems best to give the new ideas
to the public in a suggestive form so that many people may
be led to work on them more fully.
</p>

<p>
The old word <q>metaphysics</q> is an illegitimate child of
ignorance and an unnecessary word in the scientific study of
nature. Every phenomenon of nature can be classed and
studied in physics or chemistry or mathematics; the problem,
therefore, is not in any way <emph>super</emph>natural or <emph>super</emph>physical,
but belongs rather to an unknown or an undeveloped branch
of physics. The problem, therefore, may be not that of some
<emph>new</emph> science, but rather that of a new branch of mathematics,
or physics, or chemistry, etc., or all combined.
</p>

<p>
It is pathetic that only after many aeons of human existence
the dimensionality of man has been discovered and his
proper status in <emph>nature</emph> has been given by the definition
of <q>time-binder.</q> The old metaphysics, in spite of its being
far from exact, accomplished a great deal. What prevented
metaphysics from achieving more was its use of unmathematical
method, or, to be more explicit, its failure to understand
the importance of dimensions. Metaphysics used words
and conceptions of multi-dimensional meanings which of necessity
resulted in hopeless confusion, in <q>a talking</q> about
words, in mere verbalism. An example will serve to make
this clear. If we were to speak of a cow, a man, an automobile,
and a locomotive as <q>pullers,</q> and if we were not
to use any other names in connection with them, what would
happen? If we characterized these things or beings, by one
common characteristic, namely, <q>to pull,</q> havoc would be
introduced into our conceptions and in practical life; we
would try to milk an automobile or we would try to extract
gasoline from a cow, or look for a screw in a man, or we
would speculate about any or all of these things. Too obviously
<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>
nonsensical&mdash;but exactly the same thing happens, in a
much more subtle way, when we use such words as <q>life in
a crystal</q> or <q>memory in animals</q>; we are thus mentally
making a mistake no less nonsensical than the talk of <q>milking
an automobile</q> would be. Laymen are baffled by the
word dimension. They imagine that dimensions are applicable
only to space, which is three dimensional, but they are
mistaken; a moving object is four-dimensional&mdash;that is, it
has three dimensions as any object at rest, but, when the
object is moving, a fourth dimension is necessary to give its
<emph>position</emph> at any one instant. We see, therefore, that a moving
body has four dimensions, and so on. As a matter of
fact, scientific psychology will very much need mathematics,
but a special <emph>humanized</emph> mathematics. Can this be produced?
It seems to me that it can.
</p>

<p>
It is a well known fact that experimental sciences bring
us to face facts which require further theoretical elaboration;
in this way experimental sciences are a permanent source of
inspiration to mathematicians because new facts bring about
the need of new methods of analysis.
</p>

<p>
In this book a new and experimental fact has been disclosed
and analysed. It is the fact that humanity is a time-binding
class of life where the time-binding capacity or the
time-binding <hi rend="sc">energy</hi> is the highest function of humanity,
including all the so-called mental, spiritual, will, etc., powers.
In using the words mental, spiritual, and will powers, I deliberately
accept and use them in the popular, ordinary sense
without further analysing them.
</p>

<p>
Once the word and concept <emph>Time</emph> enters, the ground for
analysis and reasoning at once becomes very slippery. Mathematicians,
physicists, etc., may feel that the expression is just
a <q>well adapted one,</q> and they may not be very much
inclined to look closer into it or attentively to analyse it.
Theologians and metaphysicians probably will speculate a
great deal about it vaguely, with undefined terms and incoherent
<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>
ideas with incoherent results; which will not lead us
toward a scientific or true solution, but will keep us away
from the discovery of truth.
</p>

<p>
In the meantime two facts remain facts: namely, mathematicians
and physicists have almost all agreed with Minkowski
<q>that space by itself and time by itself, are mere
shadows, and only a kind of blend of the two exists in its
own right.</q> The other fact&mdash;psychological fact&mdash;is that <emph>time</emph>
exists psychologically by itself, undefined and not understood.
One chief difficulty is always that humans have to sit in
judgment upon their own case. The psychological time as
such, is our own human time; scientific time as such, is also
our own human time. Which one of them is the best concept&mdash;which
one more nearly corresponds to the truth about
<q>time</q>? What is time (if any) anyway? Until now we
have gone from <q>Cosmos</q> to <q>Bios,</q> from <q>Bios</q> to
<q>Logos,</q> now we are confronted with the fact that
<q>Logos</q>&mdash;Intelligence&mdash;and
Time-binding are dangerously near to
akin to each other, or may be identical. Do we in this way
approach or go back to <q>Cosmos</q>? Such are the crucial
questions which arise out of this new concept of Man. One
fact must be borne in mind, that <q>the principles of dynamics
appeared first to us, as experimental truths; but we have been
obliged to use them as definitions. It is by definition that
force is equal to the product of mass by acceleration, or that
action is equal to reaction.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>The Foundation of Science</hi>,
by Henri Poincaré); and mathematics also has its whole
foundation in a few axioms, <q>self evident,</q> but <emph>psychological
facts</emph>. It must be noted that the time-binding energy&mdash;the
higher or highest energies of man (one of its branches anyway,
for sake of discrimination let us call it <q><hi rend='italic'>M</hi></q>) when it
works properly, that is, mathematically, does <emph>not</emph> work
<emph>psychologically</emph> but works
<hi rend="sc">abstractly</hi>: the higher the abstraction
the less there is of the psychological element and
the more there is, so to say, of the pure, impersonal time-binding
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>
energy (<hi rend='italic'>M</hi>). The definition of a man as a time-binder&mdash;a
definition based on facts&mdash;suggests many reflections.
One of them is the possibility that one of the functions
of the time-binding energy in its pure form, in the
highest abstraction (<hi rend='italic'>M</hi>), works automatically&mdash;machine-like,
as it were, shaping <emph>correctly</emph> the product of its activity,
but whether <emph>truly</emph> is another matter. Mathematics does not
presume that its conclusions are true, but it does assert that
its conclusions are correct; that is the inestimable value of
mathematics. This becomes a very comprehensive fact if we
approach and analyse the mathematical processes as some
branch (<hi rend='italic'>M</hi>) of the time-binding process, which they are;
then this process at once becomes impersonal and cosmic,
because of the time-binding involved in it, no matter what
<emph>time</emph> is (if there is such a thing as time).
</p>

<p>
Is the succession of cosmos, bios, logos, time-binding taking
us right back to cosmos again? Now if we put <emph>psychological</emph>
axioms into the time-binding apparatus, it will thrash out
the results <emph>correctly</emph>, but whether the results are <emph>true</emph> is
another question.
</p>

<p>
To be able to talk about these problems I have to introduce
three new definitions, which are introduced only for
practical purposes. It may happen that after some rewording
these definitions may become scientific.
</p>

<p>
I will try to define <q>truth</q> and for this purpose I will
divide the concept <q>truth</q> into three types:
</p>

<p>
(1) Psychological, or private, or relative truth, by which
I will mean such conceptions of the truth as any one
person possesses, but different from other types of truth
(α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi>,
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi>, ...
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">n</hi>)
</p>

<p>
(2) Scientific truth (α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">s</hi>),
by which I will mean a psychological
truth when it is approved by the time-binding faculties
or apparatus in the present stage of our development.
This scientific truth represents the <q>bound-up-time</q> in our
present knowledge; and finally,
</p>

<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>

<p>
(3) The absolute truth, which will be the <emph>final definition</emph>
of a phenomenon based upon the final knowledge of <emph>primal
causation valid in infinity</emph>.
</p>

<p>
For simplicity's sake I will use the signs
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi>,
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi>, ...
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">n</hi> for the
<q>psychological,</q> <q>private,</q> or <q>relative</q> truths, between
which, for the moment, I will not discriminate.
</p>

<p>
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">s1</hi>,
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">s2</hi>, ...
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">sn</hi>,
will be used for scientific truths, and finally
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">infinity</hi>
for the absolute truth valid in infinity.
</p>

<p>
To make it easier to explain, I will illustrate the suggestions
by an example. Let us suppose that the human time-binding
capacities or energies in the <emph>organic</emph> chemistry correspond
to radium in the <emph>inorganic</emph> chemistry; being of course
of different dimensions and of absolutely different character.
It may happen, for it probably is so, that the complex time-binding
energy has many different stages of development and
different kinds of <q>rays</q> <hi rend='italic'>A</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>C</hi>, ... <hi rend='italic'>M</hi>....
</p>

<p>
Let us suppose that the so-called mental capacities are the
<hi rend='italic'>M</hi> rays of the time-binding energy; the <q>spiritual</q>
capacities, the <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> rays; the <q>will</q> powers, the
<hi rend='italic'>B</hi> rays; and so on. Psychological
truths will then be a function of all rays together,
namely <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> <hi rend='italic'>C</hi> ...
<hi rend='italic'>M</hi> ... or <hi rend='italic'>f</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>A</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>B</hi> <hi rend='italic'>C</hi> ... <hi rend='italic'>M</hi> ...),
the character of any <q>truth</q> in question will largely depend
upon which of these elements prevail.
</p>

<p>
If it were possible to isolate completely from the other
rays the <q>mental</q> process&mdash;the <q>logos</q>&mdash;the
<hi rend='italic'>M</hi> rays&mdash;and
have a complete abstraction (which in the present could only
be in mathematics), then the work of <hi rend='italic'>M</hi> could be compared
to the work of an impersonal machine which always gives
the same <emph>correctly</emph> shaped product <emph>no matter what is</emph> the
material put into it.
</p>

<p>
It is a fact that mathematics is correct&mdash;impersonal&mdash;passionless.
Again, as a matter of fact, all the basic axioms
which underlie mathematics are "psychological axioms";
therefore it may happen that these "axioms" are not of the
α<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">infinity</hi>
type but are of the <hi rend='italic'>f</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>A</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>B</hi> <hi rend='italic'>C</hi> ...) personal type and
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>
this may be why mathematics cannot account for psychological
facts. If psychology is to be an <emph>exact science</emph> it must be
mathematical in principle. And, therefore, mathematics must
find a way to embrace psychology. Here I will endeavor to
outline a way in which this can be done. To express it
correctly is more than difficult: I beg the mathematical reader
to tolerate the form and look for the sense or even the feelings
in what I attempt to express. To make it less shocking
to the ear of the pure mathematician, I will use for the
<q>infinitesimals</q> the words <q>very small numbers,</q> for the
<q>finite</q> the words <q>normal numbers</q> and for the <q>transfinite</q>
the words <q>very great numbers.</q> Instead of using
the word <q>number</q> I will sometimes use the word <q>magnitude</q>
and under the word <q>infinity</q> I will understand the
meaning as <q>limitless.</q> The base of the whole of mathematics
or rather the starting point of mathematics was
<q>psychological truths,</q> axioms concerning normal numbers,
and magnitudes that were tangible for the senses. Here to
my mind is to be found the kernel of the whole trouble. The
<emph>base</emph> of mathematics was <hi rend='italic'>f</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>A</hi> <hi rend='italic'>B</hi> <hi rend='italic'>C</hi> ...
<hi rend='italic'>M</hi> ...); the <emph>work</emph>,
or the development, of mathematics is <hi rend='italic'>f</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>M</hi>); this is the
reason for the <q>ghosts</q> in the background of mathematics.
The <hi rend='italic'>f</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>M</hi>) evolved from this
<hi rend='italic'>f</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>A</hi> <hi rend='italic'>B</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>C</hi> ... <hi rend='italic'>M</hi> ...) <emph>base</emph>
a wonderful abstract theory absolutely correct for the normal,
the very small, and for the very great numbers. But the
rules which govern the small numbers, the normal, or psychological
numbers, and the great numbers, are not the same.
As a matter of fact, in the meantime, the physical world,
the psychological world, is composed exclusively of very great
numbers and of very small magnitudes (atoms, electrons,
etc.). It seems to me that, if we want really to understand
the world and man, we shall have to start from the beginning,
from 0, then take the next very small number as the first
<emph>finite</emph> or <q>normal number</q>; then the old finites or the normal
numbers would become very great numbers and the old very-great
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>
numbers would become the very great of the second
order and so on. Such transposed mathematics would become
psychological and philosophic mathematics and mathematical
philosophy would become philosophic mathematics. The
immediate and most vital effect would be, that the <emph>start</emph>
would be made not somewhere in the middle of the magnitudes
but from the beginning, or from the limit <q>zero,</q>
from the <q>0</q>&mdash;from the intrinsic <q>to be or not to be</q>&mdash;and
the next to it would be the very first small magnitude,
the physical and therefore psychological continuum (I use
the words physical continuum in the way Poincaré used them)
would become a mathematical continuum in this new philosophic
mathematics. This new branch of philosophic, psychological
mathematics would be absolutely rigorous, correct and
<emph>true</emph> in addition to which, maybe, it would change or enlarge
and make humanly tangible for the layman, the concept of
numbers, continuum, infinity, space, time and so on. Such
a mathematics would be the mathematics for the time-binding
psychology. Mathematical philosophy is the highest philosophy
in existence; nevertheless, it could be changed to a
still higher order in the way indicated here and become philosophic
or psychological mathematics. This new science, of
course, would not change the ordinary mathematics for
ordinary purposes. It would be a special mathematics for the
study of Man dealing only with the <q>natural finites</q> (the
old infinitesimals) and great numbers of different orders
(including the normal numbers), but starting from a real,
common base&mdash;from 0, and next to it very small number,
which is a common <emph>tangible</emph> base for <emph>psychological</emph> as well
as <emph>analytical</emph> truths.
</p>

<p>
This new philosophic mathematics would eliminate the
concept of <q>infinitesimals</q> as such, which is an <emph>artificial</emph> concept
and is not as a <emph>concept</emph> an element of Nature. The so-called
<emph>infinitesimals are Nature's real, natural finites</emph>. In
mathematics the infinitesimals were an analytical&mdash;an
<q><hi rend='italic'>M</hi></q>&mdash;time-binding&mdash;necessity,
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>
because of our starting point. I
repeat once again that this transposition of our starting point
would not affect the normal mathematics for normal purposes;
it would build rather a new philosophic mathematics
rigorously correct where analytical facts would be also psychological
facts. This new mathematics would not only give
correct results but also <emph>true</emph> results. Keeping in mind <emph>both</emph>
conceptions of time, the scientific time and the psychological
time, we may see that the human capacity of <q>Time-binding</q>
is a very practical one and that this time-binding faculty is a
<emph>functional</emph> name and definition for what we broadly mean
by human <q>intelligence</q>; which makes it obvious that time
(in any understanding of the term) is somehow very closely
related to intelligence&mdash;the mental and spiritual activities
of man. <emph>All we know about <q>time</q> will explain to us a
great deal about Man, and all we know about Man will
explain to us a great deal about time</emph>, if we consider <emph>facts</emph>
alone. The <q>ghosts</q> in the background will rapidly vanish
and become intelligible facts for philosophic mathematics.
The most vital importance, nevertheless, is that taking zero
as the limit and the next to it very small magnitude for the
real starting point, it will give us a mathematical science from
a natural base where <emph>correct</emph> formulas will be also true formulas
and will correspond to psychological truths.
</p>

<p>
We have found that man is an exponential function where
time enters as an exponent. If we compare the formula for
organic growth <hi rend='italic'>y==e<hi rend="vertical-align: super">kt</hi></hi>,
with the formula <q><hi rend='italic'>P
R<hi rend="vertical-align: super">T</hi></hi>,</q> we see
that they are of the same type and the <emph>law of organic growth</emph>
applies to the human <emph>time-binding energy</emph>. We see, too, that
the time-binding energy is also <q><emph>alive</emph></q> and multiplying in
larger and larger families. The formula for the decomposing
of radium is the same&mdash;only the exponent is negative
instead of positive. This fact is indeed very curious and suggestive.
Procreation, the organic growth, is also some function
of time. I call <q>time-linking</q> for the sake of difference.
<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>
Whether the energy of procreation or that of
<q>time-linking</q> can be accounted for in units of chemical
energy taken up in food, I do not know. Not so with the
mind&mdash;this <q>time-binding,</q> higher exponential energy, <q>able
to direct basic powers.</q> If we analyse this energy, free from
any speculation, we will find that this higher energy which
is somehow directly connected with <q>time</q>&mdash;no matter what
time is&mdash;is able to <emph>produce</emph>, by transformation or by drawing
on other sources of energy, new energies unknown
to nature. Thus the solar energy transformed into coal
is, for instance, transformed into the energy of the drive
of a piston, or the rotary energy in a steam engine, and
so on. It is obvious that no amount of <emph>chemical</emph> energy
in food can account for such an energy as the time-binding
energy. There is only one supposition left, namely, that the
time-binding apparatus has a source for its tremendous energy
in the <emph>transformation of organic atoms</emph>, and&mdash;what is very
characteristic&mdash;the results are <emph>time</emph>-binding energies.
</p>

<p>
This supposition is almost a certainty because it seems to
be the only possible supposition to account for that energy.
This supposition, which seems to be the only supposition,
would bring us to face striking facts, namely, the transformation
of organic atoms, which means a direct drawing upon
the cosmic energy; and this cosmic energy&mdash;time&mdash;and intelligence
are somehow connected&mdash;if not indeed equivalent.
Happily these things can be verified in scientific laboratories.
Radium was discovered only a few years ago and is still
very scarce, but the results for science and life are already
tremendous because scientific methods were applied in the
understanding and use of it. We did not use any zoological
or theological methods, but just direct, correct and scientific
methods. There is no scarcity in <q>human radium,</q> but, to
my knowledge, physicists have never attempted to study this
energy from that point of view. I am confident that, if once
they start, there will be results in which all the so-called
<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>
<q>supernatural, spiritual, psychic</q> phenomena, such as are not
fakes, will become scientifically understood and will be consciously
utilized. Now they are mostly wasted or only
played with. It may happen that the science of Man&mdash;as
the science of time-binding&mdash;will disclose to us the inner and
final secrets&mdash;the final truth&mdash;of nature, valid in infinity.
</p>

<p>
It is very difficult to give in such a book as this an adequate
list of the literature which may help to orient the
reader in a general way in the great advance science has
made in the last few years. This book is a pioneer book in
its own way, and so there are no books dealing directly with
its subject. There are two branches of science and one art
which are fundamental for the further development of the
subject; these two sciences are (1) Mathematical philosophy
and (2) Scientific biology, the art is the art of creative engineering.
</p>

<p>
In mathematical philosophy there are to my knowledge only
four great mathematical writers who treat the subject as a
distinct science. They are two English scientists, Bertrand
Russell and A. N. Whitehead; one Frenchman, Henri Poincaré
(deceased); and one American, Professor C. J. Keyser.
Messrs. Russell and Whitehead approach the problems from
a purely logical point of view and therein lies the peculiar
value of their work. Henri Poincaré was a physicist (as
well as a mathematician) and, therefore, approaches the problems
somewhat from a physicist's point of view, a circumstance
giving his philosophy its particular value. Professor
Keyser approaches the problems from both the logical and
the warmly human points of view; in this is the great human
and practical value of his work.
</p>

<p>
These four scientists are unique in their respective elaborations
and elucidations of mathematical philosophy. It is not
for me to advise the reader what selections to make, for if
a thorough knowledge of the subject is desired the reader
should read all these books, but not all readers are willing
<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>
to make that effort toward clear thinking (which in the
meantime will remain of the <emph>highest</emph> importance in science).
Some readers will wish to select for themselves and to facilitate
their selection I will lay out a <q>Menu</q> of this intellectual
feast by giving in some cases the chapter heads.
</p>

<p>
For many temporary reasons I was not able, before going
into print, to give a fuller list of the writings of those four
unique men; but there is no stroke of their pen but which
should be read with great attention&mdash;besides which there is
a very valuable literature about their work.
</p>

<div>
<head>(1) The purely mathematical foundation:</head>

<div>
<head><hi rend="sc">Russell, Bertrand.</hi></head>

<p>
<q>The Principles of Mathematics.</q> Cambridge University,
1903.
</p>

<p>
(I am not giving any selections from the contents of
this book because this book should, without doubt,
be read by every one interested in mathematical
philosophy.)
</p>

<p>
<q>The Problems of Philosophy.</q> H. Holt &amp; Co., N. Y.,
1912.
</p>

<p>
<q>Our Knowledge of the External World, as a Field for
Scientific Method in Philosophy.</q> Chicago, 1914.
</p>

<p>
<q>Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy.</q> Macmillan,
N. Y.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
Definition of number. The Definition of order.
Kinds of relations. Infinite cardinal numbers. Infinite
series and ordinals. Limits and continuity.
The axiom of infinity and logical types. Classes.
Mathematics and logic.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mysticism and Logic.</q> Longmans Green &amp; Co. 1919.
N. Y.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
Mathematics and the metaphysicians. On scientific
method in philosophy. The ultimate constituents
of matter. On the notion of cause.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>

<div>
<head><hi rend="sc">Whitehead, Alfred N.</hi></head>

<p>
<q>An Introduction to Mathematics.</q> Henry Holt &amp; Co.
1911. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Organization of Thought Educational and Scientific.</q>
London, 1917.
</p>

<p>
Selections from contents:
The principles of mathematics in relation to elementary
teaching. The organization of thought. The
anatomy of some scientific ideas. Space, time, and
relativity.
</p>

<p>
<q>An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural
Knowledge.</q> Cambridge, 1919.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
The traditions of science. The data of science. The
method of extensive abstraction. The theory of
objects.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Concept of Nature.</q> Cambridge, 1920.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
Nature and thought. Time. The method of extensive
abstraction. Space and motion. Objects. The
ultimate physical concepts.
</p>

<p>
<q>Principia Mathematica.</q> By A. N. Whitehead and
Bertrand Russell. Cambridge, 1910-1913.
</p>

<p>
This monumental work stands alone. <q>As a work
of constructive criticism it has never been surpassed.
To every one and especially to philosophers and men
of natural science, it is an amazing revelation of how
the familiar terms with which they deal plunge their
roots far into the darkness beneath the surface of
common sense. It is a noble monument to the critical
spirit of science and to the idealism of our time.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Human Worth of Rigorous Thinking.</q> C. J. Keyser.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>(2) The physicist's point of view:</head>

<div>
<head><hi rend="sc">Poincaré, Henri.</hi></head>

<p>
<q>The Foundations of Science.</q> The Science Press,
N. Y., 1913.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
Science and hypothesis. Number and magnitude.
<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>
Space. Force. Nature. II. The value of science.
The mathematical sciences. The physical sciences.
The objective value of science. III. Science and
method. Science and the scientist. Mathematical reasoning.
The new mechanics. Astronomic science.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>(3) The human, civilizing, practical life, point of view:</head>

<div>
<head><hi rend="sc">Keyser, Cassius J.</hi></head>

<p>
<q>Science and Religion: The Rational and the Super-rational.</q>
The Yale University Press.
</p>

<p>
<q>The New Infinity and the Old Theology.</q> The Yale
University Press.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Human Worth of Rigorous Thinking.</q> Essays
and Addresses. Columbia University Press, 1916.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
The human worth of rigorous thinking. The human
significance of mathematics. The walls of the world;
or concerning the figure and the dimensions of the
Universe of space. The universe and beyond. The
existence of the hypercosmic. The axiom of infinity:
A new presupposition of thought. Research in American
Universities. Mathematical productivity in the
United States.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mathematical Philosophy, the Study of Fate and Freedom.
Lectures for Educated Laymen.</q> Forthcoming
Book.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents of general interest:
The mathematical obligations of philosophy. Humanistic
and industrial education. Logic the muse of
thought. Radiant aspects of an over-world.&mdash;Verifiers
and falsifiers. Significance and nonsense.&mdash;Distinction
of logical and psychological. A diamond
test of harmony.&mdash;Distinction of doctrine and method.&mdash;Theoretical
and practical doubt.&mdash;Mathematical
philosophy in the rôle of critic. A world uncriticised&mdash;the
garden of the devil. <q>Supersimian</q> Wisdom.
Autonomous truth and autonomous falsehood. Other
Varieties of truth and untruth. Mathematics as the
study of fate and freedom. The prototype of reasoned
discourse often disguised as in the Declaration
of Independence, the Constitution of the United
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>
States, the Origin of Species, the Sermon on the Mount.&mdash;Nature
of mathematical transformation. No transformation,
no thinking. Transformation law essentially
psychological, Relation function and transformation
as three aspects of one thing. Its study,
the common enterprise of science. The static and
the dynamic worlds. The problem of time and
kindred problems. Importation of time and suppression
of time as the classic devices of sciences.&mdash;The
nature of invariance. The ages-old problem of
permanence and change. The quest of what abides
in a fluctuant world as the binding thread of human
history. The tie of comradeship among the enterprises
of human spirit.&mdash;The concept of a group.
The notion simply exemplified in many fields, is
<q>Mind</q> a group. The philosophy of the cosmic
year.&mdash;Limits and limit processes omnipresent as
ideals and idealization, in all thought and human
aspiration. Ideals the flint of reality.&mdash;Mathematical
infinity, its dynamic and static aspects. Need of
history of the Imperious concept. The rôle of infinity
in a mighty poem.&mdash;Meaning of dimensionality.
Distinction of imagination and conception. Logical
existence and sensuous existence. Open avenues to
unimaginable worlds.&mdash;The theory of logical types.
A supreme application of it to definition of man, and
the science of human welfare.&mdash;The psychology of
mathematics and the mathematics of psychology.
Both of them in their infancy. Consequent retardation
of science. The symmetry of thought. The
asymmetry of imagination.&mdash;Science and engineering.
Science as engineering in preparation. Engineering
as science in action. Mathematics the guide of the
engineer. Engineering the guide of humanity. Humanity
the civilizing or Time-Binding class of life.
Qualities essential to engineering leadership. The
ethics of the art. The engineer as educator, as
scientist, as philosopher, as psychologist, as economist,
as statesman, as mathematical thinker&mdash;as a Man.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Appendix II. Biology And Time-Binding"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Appendix II. Biology And Time-Binding"/>
<anchor id="Appendix_II"/>
<head>Appendix II. Biology And Time-Binding</head>

<p>
The life of one man is short, and to very few is it given
to achieve much in their lifetime. Extensive achievements
are made almost entirely by many men taking up the work
done by a discoverer. In such a case, we arrive at a <emph>complete</emph>
<q>truth,</q> not by the production of one man but by a
chain of men, but the initial discovery not only has to be
produced but correctly defined before it can be used and
that is the important point to be made. What we do not
realize is the tremendous amount of mental work that is lost
by an incorrect use of words.
</p>

<p>
Human thought&mdash;that unique, subtle and yet most energetic
phenomenon of nature&mdash;is in the main wantonly wasted,
because we do not use, or take pains to use, suitable language;
at the same time, false definitions lead to consequences
not merely wasteful but positively harmful. When ideas and
facts are falsely defined, they tend to bring us to false conclusions,
and false conclusions lead us in wrong directions,
and life and knowledge greatly suffer in consequence. Our
progress is not a well ordered pursuit after truth, as pure
chance plays too large a part in it.
</p>

<p>
Until lately, logic was supposed to be the science of correct
thinking, but modern thought has progressed so far that the
old logic is not able to handle the great accumulated volume&mdash;the
great complicated mass of existing ideas and facts&mdash;and
so we are forced to look for another instrument much more
expedient and powerful. There is no need to establish a
new science to replace logic; we simply have to look closer
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>
into the sciences at hand and realize the fact, which was
with us all the time, namely, that mathematics and mathematical
reasoning is nothing else than the true logic of nature&mdash;nature's
universal tongue&mdash;the one means of expression that
is the same for all peoples. This is not a play on words,
it is a fact which, after investigation, everybody must admit.
Everybody who wants to think logically must think mathematically
or give up any pretense of correct thinking&mdash;there
is no escape and all who refuse to investigate the justice of
this statement put themselves outside the pale of logically
thinking people. The application of rigorous thinking to life
will even revolutionize scientific methods by the introduction
of right definitions, correct classifications, just language, and
so will lead to trustworthy results. Very probably all our
doctrines and creeds will have to be revised; some rejected,
some rectified, some broadened; bringing about unanimity
of all sciences and thus greatly increasing their effectiveness
in the pursuit of truth. This application of mathematics to
life will even revolutionize mathematics itself. In App. I
it is suggested tentatively how this may be accomplished.
</p>

<p>
As the seemingly ultimate and highest experimentally
known energy is the human time-binding energy, this new
concept may lead to a change in our present concepts of
matter, space and time, in much the same way as the discovery
of radium has affected them. This problem can be
solved only by <emph>scientific</emph> experiments with the <emph>time</emph>-binding
energy.
</p>

<p>
In many, even in most, of the cases, the analysis of these
phenomena presents great technical difficulty, but why confuse
our minds by being afraid of, or being a slave of words?
If instead of calling wine <emph>wine</emph>, we called it by its chemical
formula, would this, in any way, change the quality of wine?
Of course not. All the <q>qualities</q> will remain because they
are facts, and cannot be altered by words.
</p>

<p>
A most pathetic picture of the havoc and chaos which
<pb n="226"/><anchor id="Pg226"/>
wrong use of words brings into life and science is exhibited
in all fields of thought by the endless and bitter fighting over
words not well defined. Mathematics has been able to make
its most stupendous achievements because of its method of
exact analysis of the continuum, dimensions, classes, relations,
functions, transfinite numbers, etc., and also of space
and time. Hitherto, not all of these conceptions in their
sharply defined form have had direct application to our daily
life or to our world conception. The thoughts expressed in
App. I may suggest this <q>missing link</q>&mdash;connecting mathematics
more intimately with life.
</p>

<p>
Modern science knows that all energies can be somehow
transformed from one kind to another and that all of them
represent one type of energetic phenomena, no matter what
is the origin of each. For example, a galvanic or chemical
battery produces the same kind of electricity as the mechanical
process of friction or the interaction of cosmic laws as
in the dynamo. In some instances, when our systems are suitably
adjusted, the transformations are reversible, that is, the
energy results in a chemical process&mdash;an accumulator; the
chemical process results in electricity&mdash;the galvanic battery;
motion results in electricity&mdash;the dynamo; electricity results
in motion&mdash;the electric motor; etc. We know all energies
are somehow related to each other, in that their transformation
is possible. The effects produced by the same type of
energy are absolutely the same&mdash;no matter what its origin.
The marvel of an electric lamp is the same marvel, whether
the origin of the electricity be chemical, mechanical or cosmic
as in the dynamo. The experiments in scientific biology
have proved this to be true in living organisms and just this
is the tremendous importance of the discoveries in scientific
biology. Light and other energies react on organisms in the
same way as the chemical reactions and these phenomena
are reversible. More than that, living complex organisms
have been produced which grew to maturity through a chemical
<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>
or mechanical treatment of the egg, and this has been
accomplished in the infancy of scientific biology! (See <hi rend='italic'>The
Organisms as a Whole</hi>, by Jacques Loeb.)
</p>

<p>
All phenomena <emph>in nature</emph> are <emph>natural</emph> and should be approached
as <emph>such</emph>. The human mind is at least an energy
which can direct other energies; it is incorrect and misleading
to call it <emph>super</emph>natural. It is of course true that we do
not fully understand the nature of the human mind and we
shall learn to understand it when and only when we acquire
sense enough to recognize it as <emph>natural</emph>. If we persist in
saying and believing that the <q>spiritual evidences cannot be
explained on a material base,</q> this statement should be equally
applicable to electricity or radium. If this statement is false
for these phenomena, it is equally false for the mind or the
so-called spiritual and will powers. The scientific understanding
of these phenomena will not <q>degrade</q> these phenomena,
<emph>because that cannot be done. Facts remain facts and
no scientific explanation of a phenomenon can lower or degrade
that which is a fact.</emph> Electricity is electricity and
nothing else, no matter what its origin; human time-binding
energies (embracing all faculties) are the highest of the
known energies&mdash;equally magnificent and astonishing&mdash;no
matter what the base; and the scientific understanding of them
will only <emph>add</emph> to our respect for them and for ourselves; it
will unmistakably help us to develop them indefinitely by
mathematical analysis. The <emph>base</emph> is not the phenomenon&mdash;sulphuric
acid and zinc <emph>are not</emph> electricity; time-binding
energies <emph>are not</emph> a pound of beefsteak, although a pound of
beefsteak may help to save life and be therefore <emph>instrumental</emph>
in the production of a poem or of a sonata; but by no means
can a beefsteak be taken for either of them.
</p>

<p>
I have attempted, with some measure of success I trust,
to solve these problems in science and life; the results are
astonishing, as they lead us to a much higher and more embracing
ethics than society has ever had. By this analysis
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>
I prove that the understanding of this most stupendous but
<hi rend="sc">natural</hi> phenomenon of human life brings us to the scientifical
source of ethics and I prove that the so-called <q>highest
ideals of humanity</q> have nothing of <q>sentimentalism</q> or of
the <q><emph>super</emph>natural</q> in them,
but are exclusively the <emph>fulfilment</emph>
of the <emph>natural laws</emph> for the <emph>human class of life</emph>.
The recognition of the fact that the phenomena of the human mind
are natural and as such conform to natural law has the further
advantage over the <q>supernatural</q> attitude in that we
can no more evade a law of human nature than the law of
gravity; in other words, human ethics will have the validity
of natural law. With the supernatural attitude, it was simple
enough to avoid the issues of life, by a simple statement&mdash;<q>I
do not believe</q>&mdash;and that was enough to break all bonds and
be free from the <q>supernatural morale</q>&mdash;but to get away
from the <q>natural morale</q> and <emph>remain</emph>
<hi rend="sc">human</hi> is <hi rend="sc">impossible</hi>.
Whereas, with an artificially formulated morale it
was easy enough to break away by a simple mental speculation,
and feel perfectly satisfied as long as one escaped the
jail; with a morale made clear that it is a <hi rend="sc">natural law</hi> for
the human class of life, the curtain of sophistry and speculation
is removed and everyone who breaks away from the
<hi rend="sc">natural laws for humans, will know by himself,
that he is outside the law&mdash;for humans</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Engineers are not metaphysicians, their field is not one of
clever argument but one of proved facts; their work is not
to befog the air with cloudy expressions or sophistry, but to
create; their method is scientific and their tool is mathematics.
It is known that in remote antiquity, in some temples
electrical phenomena were known and were used to keep
the ignorant masses in awe and obedience. Shall we follow
the methods used by those magicians or shall we squarely
face facts? Shall we look upon life, and the usually so-called
mental, spiritual phenomena, etc., as <emph>super</emph>natural, simply
because we do not understand them? It seems evident that
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>
everything which <emph>exists in nature, is natural</emph>, no matter how
simple or complicated a phenomenon it is; and on no occasion
can the so-called <q><emph>super</emph>natural</q> be anything else than
a completely natural law, though it may, at the moment, be
above or beyond our present understanding. The attitude
of mind which admits the <emph>super</emph>natural blinds and frustrates
any analysis or any attempt at analysis. The unprejudiced
analysis of the so-called <q>supernatural</q> does not <emph>alter</emph> any
part of the strange and high functions of it. The phenomena
of the human time-binding energy are and will remain the
most precious, subtle and highest of known functions, no
matter what the origin. <emph>Facts</emph> may not be <emph>denied</emph>
or <emph>falsified</emph>
if analysis is to arrive at correct conclusions. The high
dimensionality of the human mind, the so-called spiritual and
will powers, <emph>are facts</emph> and must be <emph>accepted</emph> as such. It is
about time to establish an exact science to deal with them.
The problems of animal life were approached without prejudice,
no supernatural <q>spark</q> was bothering us in our analysis&mdash;an
animal was an animal and nothing else&mdash;we did not
intermix dimensions, therefore we see that the <q>social structure</q>
of the animals on a farm never breaks down as they
are managed on a scientific base with an understanding of
<emph>their</emph> proper standards. Animals to-day live more happily
than man. We don't allow animals to practice the <q>survival
of the fittest,</q> or <q>competition,</q> which is far too destructive.
Our present social system imposes these disastrous methods
upon man alone, and the result is that the hideous proverb
<q>Homo homini lupus</q> has become true.
</p>

<p>
In modern science facts are not wanting, we have first but
to know them. If we take, for example, sulphuric acid and
zinc and make what we call a galvanic battery, we see that
from two chemical substances a third&mdash;a salt&mdash;is made in
addition to which we have a peculiar energy produced called
electricity. Who does not know the marvelous properties
of this phenomenon?
</p>

<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>

<p>
Scientific biology has made tremendous progress lately;
engineers cannot afford to ignore the facts established in laboratory
researches. The problem of <q>life</q> and of other energies,
hitherto considered <q><emph>super</emph>natural,</q> is well in hand, and
proves to be none the less astonishing though entirely natural.
A number of scientists all over the world are working at this
problem and the scientific facts which they have established,
and which cannot now be denied, belong to-day to the realm
of practical life. Engineers, of course, have to know these
facts; mathematicians have to establish correct dimensions in
the study of all the sciences and people will have to study
mathematical philosophy; only then can the process of integration
in any phase of thought be made without mistakes.
There is no escape from that, if <emph>truth</emph> is what we really want.
But here one objection may be raised, an objection which
for some is a serious one indeed; namely, what will take the
place of the old philosophy, law and ethics, if human life
is nothing else than a physico-chemical process? To quote
Doctor Jacques Loeb from his <hi rend='italic'>Mechanistic Conception of
Life</hi>: <q>If on the basis of a serious survey, this question (<emph>that
all life phenomena can be unequivocally explained in physico-chemical
terms</emph>&mdash;Author) can be answered in the affirmative,
our social and ethical life will have to be put on a scientific
basis and our rules of conduct must be brought into harmony
with the results of scientific biology. Not only is the mechanistic
conception of life compatible with ethics, it seems the
only conception of life which can lead to an understanding of
the source of ethics.</q>
</p>

<p>
I hope to have proved in this book that <emph>scientific</emph> ethics is
based on natural laws for the human class of life; that it is
based on the experimentally proved fact that Man is a Time-binder,
naturally active as such in time; and that this concept
or definition of Man is rigorously scientific and accounts
for the highest functions of man&mdash;the highest of the mental
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>
and spiritual perfections&mdash;without the need of
any <q><emph>super</emph>natural</q>
hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
Scientific biology proves the fact that life and all of its
phenomena are the results of some special physico-chemical
processes, which manifest themselves in some peculiar energies,
of which the human mind is the highest known form. These
processes are known to be reversible, in that some of these
peculiar energies cause physico-chemical changes in their own
base; the process involved I propose to call biolysis, as I propose
to call biolyte the substances produced. These phenomena
have a parallel analogy in inorganic chemistry&mdash;in electricity&mdash;the
difference being only in the scale or dimension.
When an electric current is passed through a special battery
called an accumulator or reversible battery, chemical changes
occur, in that new compounds are formed which possess a
reversible capacity; namely, in reproducing the former materials&mdash;that
is, electricity is generated. This process of forming
chemical substances by the passing of an electrical current
is called electrolysis and the product so produced is called
electrolyte. At the same time it is a known fact that organic
chemistry is infinitely more complicated and variable than
inorganic chemistry. The energy produced by the reactions
of some organic chemical groups are, therefore, of a more
complicated character and of another dimension. One of
these energies of organic chemistry which lately has come into
the scope of scientific analysis is called life&mdash;its physico-chemical
base is the protoplasm, which <emph>result</emph> I call the
<q>time-linking</q> capacity or energy. This name is important
for the consequences it will bring about later on. The time-binding
capacity or energy of man (no matter what time
is&mdash;if it is), which is unique to man, is a most subtle complex;
it is the highest known energy and probably has many
subdivisions. Ears are sensitive to the vibration of the
air. Eyes are sensitive to the more subtle vibrations of
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>
light; in a similar way, the time-binding apparatus is sensitive
to the most subtle energies; besides which it has the
capacity to register not only all of our sensations but also
the time-binding energies of other people; and it apparently
has the capacity to register the energies of the universe.
</p>

<p>
Here again we see the same continuity of phenomena; the
protoplasm as a complex organic physico-chemical unit which
has the peculiarity to <q>live,</q> to grow and multiply <q>autonomously</q>
and this same autonomous peculiarity <emph>applies</emph> to the
<emph>time-binding energy</emph>; it grows and multiplies <q>autonomously</q>
in its own dimension. The time-binding energy is a complex
radiating energy somewhat like the emanations of radium
and it probably also has many different subdivisions. <emph>Note
that the transformation of the atom</emph> or the transformation of
<emph>radio-active substances after passing different stages, is not
complete but probably ends in lead, whereas the transformation
which occurs in the production of the time-binding energy
probably is complete or nearly complete and is that which I
call the time-binding energy. (See <ref target="Appendix_I">App. I</ref>.)</emph>
All the higher
characteristics of man which it is customary to call the <q>mental,
spiritual and will powers,</q> etc., are embraced in this
exact definition of energy&mdash;in the capacity of time-binding.
A diagram will better explain the continuity, evolution and
mechanism of this time-binding energy.
</p>

<figure url="images/233.png" rend="width: 100%">
  <head>Biology and Time-Binding.</head>
  <figDesc>
    A series of circles, connected by lines, the leftmost circle being
    C<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi>, then next
    C<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi>, and so on to
    C<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">7</hi>.
    The first is connected to the second by line
    T<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi>, the second to the third by
    T<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi>, etc.
    Each circle after the first has within it an energy indication,
    E<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi>,
    E<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi>, etc.
  </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>C<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>
is the physico-chemical base (for simplicity I represent
the whole complex as one base) of the human time-binding
energy. <hi rend='italic'>T<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>
is the thought produced by a physico-chemical
process (corresponding, for illustration's sake only, to electricity
produced by a galvanic battery). The thought
<hi rend='italic'>T<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>
in turn produces a physico-chemical effect
<hi rend='italic'>E<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi> on the base
<hi rend='italic'>C<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>
(corresponding for the same reason to electrolysis and
electrolyte in electricity).
<hi rend='italic'>C<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>E<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi> combined, or
<hi rend='italic'>C<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi> produces
<hi rend='italic'>T<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>
which again in turn affects the base and produces a physico-chemical effect
<hi rend='italic'>E<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>,
this new combination produces the energy
<hi rend='italic'>T<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>,
and so on ... theoretically without limits,
<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/>
as long as there is <emph>any source</emph> of energy upon which this
special energy can draw. This theory which I call the
<q>spiral theory</q> represents a suggestive working mechanism
of the time-binding energy and is in accord with the latest
scientific discoveries. It explains the processes of all the
mental and so-called spiritual energies which have been such
a puzzle to humanity, and it also explains other phenomena
which, until now, have had no scientific explanation whatever.
</p>

<p>
The animals are <emph>not</emph> time-binding, they have <emph>not</emph> the
capacity of the <q>spiral</q>; therefore, they have not autonomous
progress. At the same time, it will be obvious that if we
teach humans false ideas, we affect their time-binding capacities
and energies very seriously, by affecting in a wrong
way the physico-chemical base. This energy is so peculiar
that it embraces, if I may use the old expression, the highest
ideals (when the time-binding energy is unobstructed and is
allowed to work normally), and also the most criminal ideas
(when the time-binding energy is obstructed by false teachings
and in consequence works abnormally). We cannot make
animals moral or immoral because they have not this time-binding
capacity. Whereas human progress can be very
seriously affected by false ideas; in other words, the biolyte
of false teachings in the animal dimension must be very different
from the biolyte of true ideas in the human dimension.
Nature or nature's laws happily cannot be completely deviated
from or violated&mdash;the time-binding energy cannot be
completely suppressed in the time-binding class of life. The
false teachings that we are animals and essentially brutal and
selfish can, of course, degrade human nature not only down
to the animal level but lower still. Happily now science can
explain and prove how fundamentally fiendish in effect are
these teachings in the life and progress of human beings.
It will be a shock to those who teach, preach and practice
animal standards and in the same breath contradict themselves
in any talking about <q>immortality</q> and <q>salvation</q>;
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>
a little thought makes it perfectly clear that <q>animal standards</q>
and <q>salvation</q> or <q>immortality</q> simply exclude each
other. With the natural law of time-binding realized, the
way is open to entering scientifically upon the problem of
immortality. The time-binding energies as well as <q>life</q>
follow the same type of exponential function. <q>The constant
synthesis then of specific material from simple compounds
of a non-specific character is the chief feature by
which living matter differs from non-living matter.... This
problem of synthesis leads to the assumption of immortality
of the living cell, since there is no <hi rend='italic'>a priori</hi> reason why this
synthesis should ever come to a standstill of its own accord
as long as enough food is available and the proper outside
physical conditions are guaranteed.... The idea that the
body cells are naturally immortal and die only if exposed
to extreme injuries such as prolonged lack of oxygen or too
high a temperature helps to make one problem more intelligible.
The medical student, who for the first time realizes
that life depends upon that one organ, the heart, doing its
duty incessantly for the seventy years or so allotted to man,
is amazed at the precariousness of our existence. It seems
indeed uncanny that so delicate a mechanism should function
so regularly for so many years. The mysticism connected
with this and other phenomena of adaptation would disappear
if we would be certain that all cells are really immortal
and that the fact which demands an explanation is not the
continued activity but the cessation of activity in death. Thus
we see that the idea of the immortality of the body cell if
it can be generalized may be destined to become one of the
main supports for a complete physico-chemical analysis of life
phenomena since it makes the durability of organisms intelligible....</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>The Organism as a Whole</hi>, by Jacques Loeb.)
</p>

<p>
The outlook for those who live and profess selfish, greedy,
<q>space-binding animal standards</q> is not very promising as
disclosed by the <q>spiral,</q> but unhappily we cannot help them;
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>
only time-binding&mdash;only fulfilling the natural laws for
humans&mdash;can give them the full benefit of their natural
capacities by which they will be able to raise themselves above
animals and their fate.
</p>

<p>
The results obtained in scientific biological researches are
growing very rapidly and every advance in their knowledge
proves this theory to be true. If they differ in a few instances
it is not because the principles of this theory are wrong, but
because they intermix dimensions and use words not sufficiently
defined which always results in confusion and the
checking of the progress of science.
</p>

<p>
Most of the problems touched upon in this appendix from
a mathematical point of view are based upon laboratory facts.
We have only to collect them and there is little need of
imagination to see their general bearing. Since we have discovered
the fact that Man is a time-binder (no matter what
time is) and have introduced the sense of dimensionality into
the study of life phenomena in general, a great many facts
which were not clear before become very clear now.
</p>

<p>
I wrote this book on a farm without any books at hand
and I had been out of touch with the progress of science for
the five years spent in the war service and war duties. My
friend Dr. Grove-Korski, formerly at Berkeley University,
drew my attention particularly to the books of Dr. Jacques
Loeb. I found there a treasury of laboratory facts which
illustrate as nothing better could, the correctness of my theory.
I found with deep satisfaction that the new <q>scientific biology</q>
is scientific because it has used mathematical methods with
notable regard to dimensionality&mdash;they do not <q>milk an automobile.</q>
</p>

<p>
For the mathematician and the engineer, the <q>tropism
theory of animal conduct,</q> founded by Dr. J. Loeb, is of
the greatest interest, because this is a theory which analyses
the functions and reactions of an organism <emph>as a whole</emph> and
<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>
therefore there is no chance for confusion of ideas or the
intermixing of dimensions.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Physiologists have long been in the habit of studying not
the reactions of the whole organism but the reactions of isolated
segments; the so-called reflexes. While it may seem justifiable
to construct the reactions of the organism as a whole from
the individual reflexes, such an attempt is in reality doomed to
failure, since the reactions produced in an isolated element
cannot be counted upon to occur when the same element is part
of the whole, on account of the mutual inhibitions which the
different parts of the organism produce upon each other when
in organic connection; and it is, therefore, impossible to express
the conduct of a whole animal as the algebraic sum of the reflexes
of its isolated segments.... It would, therefore, be a misconception
to speak of tropism as of reflexes, since tropisms are
reactions of the organism as a whole, while reflexes are reactions
of isolated segments. Reflexes and tropisms agree, however, in
one respect, inasmuch as both are obviously of a purely physico-chemical
character.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Forced Movements&mdash;Tropism and Animal
Conduct.</hi> By Jacques Loeb.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
I will quote here only a very few passages, but these books
are of such importance that every mathematician and engineer
should read them. They are, if I may say so, a <q>mathematical
biology</q>&mdash;the survey of a life long study of <q>tropisms,</q>
which is the name given to express <q>forced movements</q>
in organisms. They give the quintessence of laboratory experiments
as to what are the effects of different energies such
as light (heliotropism), electricity (galvanotropism), gravity
(geotropism), etc., in their reaction and influence upon the
movements and actions of living organisms. These experiments
are conclusive and the conclusions arrived at cannot
be overlooked or evaded. The tremendous practical results
of such scientific methods are based upon two principles,
namely: that, (1) the scientists must think mathematically,
their studies of the phenomena must be in <q>systems</q> as a
complex whole, and they must not intermix dimensions; (2)
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>
they must see the danger and not be afraid of old words
with wrong meanings, but must use clear and rigorous thinking
to eliminate the prejudices in science&mdash;the poison of metaphysical
speculating with words, or verbalism. These books
give ample proofs of how misleading and obscuring are the
words used and how basically wrong are the conclusions
arrived at by such scientists as still persist in using the
anthropomorphic or teleological methods of analysis. If a sceptical
or doubtful reader is interested to see an ample proof
of how deadly is the effect which an incorrect or unmathematical
manner of thinking brings into science and life&mdash;he
also may be referred to these books. The following quotations
prove biologically that man is of a totally different
dimension&mdash;a totally different being than an animal. From
Dr. Conklin I quote only from his <hi rend='italic'>Heredity and Environment</hi>
and to save a repetition of the title of the book, I
will indicate the quotations by using only his name. (All
italics are indicated by A. K.)
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>It would be of the greatest importance to show directly
that the <emph>homologous proteins of different species are different</emph>.
<emph>This has been done</emph> for hemoglobins of the blood by Reichert and
Brown, who have shown by crystallographic measurements
that the hemoglobins of any species are definite substances for
that species.... The following sentences by Reichert and
Brown seem to indicate that this may be true for the crystals of
hemoglobin. <q><emph>The hemoglobins of any species are different substances
for that species.</emph> But upon comparing the corresponding
substances hemoglobins in different species of a genus it is
generally found that they differ the one from the other to a
greater or less degree; the differences being such that when
complete crystallographic data are available the different <emph>species
can be distinguished</emph> by these <emph>differences in their
hemoglobins</emph></q>....
The facts thus far reported imply the suggestion that heredity
of the genus is determined by the proteins of a definite constitution
differing from the proteins of other genera. This constitution
of the proteins would therefore be responsible for the genus
heredity. The different species of a genus have all the same
genus proteins, but the proteins of each species of the same
genus are apparently different again in chemical constitution
<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>
and hence they may give rise to the specific biological or immunity
reactions.</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Organism as a Whole</hi>, by Jacques Loeb.
</p>
<p>
<q><emph>All peculiarities which are characteristic of a race, species,
genus, order, class and phylum are of course inherited</emph>, otherwise
there would be no constant characteristics of these groups and
no possibility of classifying organisms. The chief characters
of every living thing are unalterably fixed by heredity. Men
do not gather grapes of thorns nor figs of thistles. Every living
thing produces off-spring after its own kind, Men, horses, cattle;
birds, reptiles, fishes; insects, mollusks, worms; polyps, sponges,
micro-organisms,&mdash;all of the million known species of animals and
plants differ from one another because of inherited peculiarities,
<emph>because they have come from different kinds of germ cells</emph>.</q> Conklin.
</p>
<p>
<q>The entire organism consisting of structures and functions,
body and mind, develops out of the germ, and the organization
of the germ determines all the possibilities of development of
the mind no less than of the body, though the actual realization
of any possibility is dependent also upon environmental stimuli.</q>...
Conklin.
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">The development of the mind <emph>parallels that of the body</emph>;
whatever the ultimate relation of the mind and body may be,
there can be <emph>no</emph> reasonable <emph>doubt</emph> that the two develop together
from the germ. It is a curious fact that many people who are
seriously disturbed by scientific teaching as to the evolution or
gradual development of the human race accept with equanimity
the universal observation as to the development of the human
individual,&mdash;mind as well as body. The animal ancestry of
the race is surely no more disturbing to philosophical or religious
beliefs than the germinal origin of the individual, and yet the
latter is a fact of universal observation which cannot be relegated
to the domain of hypothesis or theory, and which can not be
successfully denied.... Now we know that the child comes
from the germ cells which are not made by the bodies of the
parents but have arisen by the division of the antecedent germ
cell. <emph>Every cell comes from a pre-existing cell</emph> by a process of
division, and <emph>every germ cell comes from a pre-existing germ cell</emph>.
Consequently it is not possible to hold, that the body generates
germ cells, nor that the soul generates souls. The only possible
scientific position is that the <emph>mind</emph> or soul as well as the body
develops from the <emph>germ</emph>.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>No fact in human experience is more certain than that the
mind develops by gradual and natural processes from a simple
condition which can scarcely be called mind at all; no fact
in human experience is fraught with greater practical and philosophical
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>
significance than this, and yet no fact is more generally
disregarded.</q> Conklin.
</p>
<p>
<q>Doubtless the elements of which <emph>consciousness</emph> develops are
<emph>present in the germ cells</emph>, in the same sense that the elements of
the other psychic processes or of the organs of the body are
there present; not as a miniature of the adult condition, but
rather in the form of elements or factors, which by long series of
combinations and transformations, due to interactions with one
another and with the environment, give rise to the fully developed
condition.... It is an interesting fact that in man, and in
several other animals which may be assumed to have a sense of
identity, the nerve cells, especially those of the <emph>brain</emph>,
<emph>cease dividing</emph> at an early age, and these identical cells persist throughout
the remainder of life.</q>...
</p>
<p>
<q>The hen does not produce the egg, but the egg produces the
hen and also other eggs. Individual traits are not transmitted
from the hen to the egg, but they develop out of germinal
factors which are carried along from <emph>cell to cell, and from generation
to generation</emph>....</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>The germ is the undeveloped organism which forms the
bond between successive generations; the person is the developed
organism which arises from the germ under the influence of
environmental conditions, the person develops and dies in each
generation; the germ-plasm is the continuous stream of living
substance which connects all generations. The person nourishes
and protects the germ, and in this sense the person is
merely the carrier of the germ-plasm, the <emph>mortal trustee</emph> of an
immortal substance.</q> Conklin.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
This is what I call <q>time-linking.</q> (Author.)
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Through intelligence and social cooperation he is able to
control environment for particular ends, in a manner quite
impossible in other organisms.... Other animals develop
much more rapidly than man but that development sooner
comes to an end. The children of lower races of man develop
more rapidly than those of higher races but in such cases they
also cease to develop at an earlier age. The prolongation of the
period of infancy and of immaturity in the human race greatly
increases the importance of environment and training as <emph>factors
of development</emph>.</q> Conklin.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Another sidelight given on the <q>Spiral theory.</q> (Author.)
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>In education also we are strangely blind to proper aims and
methods. Any education is bad which leads to the formation
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>
of habits of idleness, carelessness, failure, instead of habits of
industry, thoroughness and success. Any religious or social
institution is bad which leads to habits of pious make-believe,
insincerity, slavish regard for authority and disregard for evidence,
instead of habits of sincerity, open-mindedness and independence....</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>All that man now is he has come to be without conscious
human guidance. If evolution has progressed from the am[oe]ba
to man without human interference, if the great progress from
ape-like men to the most highly civilized races has taken place
without conscious human control, the question may well be
asked: Is it possible to improve on the natural method of evolution?
It may not be possible to improve on the method of
evolution and yet by intelligent action it may be possible to
facilitate that method. <emph>Man can not change a single law of nature
but he can put himself into such relations to natural laws that he
can profit by them.</emph></q> Conklin.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
This proves the great importance of <hi rend="sc">knowing the natural
laws</hi> for the human class of life, and making natural
time-binding impulses conscious, for then only will the spiral
give a logarithmical accumulation of the right kind, otherwise
the biolyte will be <q>animal</q> in substance as well as in
effect. Here it is immaterial how the first <q>time-binder</q> was
produced; the fact that he is of another dimension is of the
greatest importance.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>From sands to stars, from the immensity of the universe to
the minuteness of the electron, in living things no less than in
lifeless ones, science recognizes everywhere the inevitable
sequence of cause and effect, the universality of natural processes,
the reign of natural law. <emph>Man also is a part of Nature,
a part of the great mechanism of the</emph> universe, and all that he is
and <emph>does is limited and prescribed by laws of nature</emph>. Every human
being comes into existence by a process of development, every
step of which is determined by antecedent causes.... Our
anatomical, physiological, psychological possibilities were predetermined
in the <emph>germ cells</emph> from which we came....</q>
Conklin.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
This shows the importance of keeping the study of humans
in their own dimensionality, and also the importance of finding
<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>
the <hi rend="sc">impersonal natural laws</hi> for the human class of
life. Now it can be realized that all the so-called human
ideals are none else than the ever growing fulfillment of the
<hi rend="sc">natural <q>time-binding</q> laws</hi>. This understanding will
enable man to discover new <q>time-binding</q> laws for their
conduct, their business relations, their state, which will not
be a contradiction of the real, <hi rend="sc">natural laws</hi> but will be in
accord with them; then and only then human progress will
have a chance to develop peacefully.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Adult characteristics are potential and not actual in the
germ, and their actual appearance depends upon many complicated
reactions of the germinal units with one another and
with the environment. In short, our actual personalities are
not predetermined in the germ cells, but our possible personalities
are.... The influence of environment upon the minds
and morals of men is especially great. To a large extent our
habits, words, thoughts; our aspirations, ideals, satisfactions;
our responsibility, morality, religion are the results of the
environment and education of our early years....</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Owing to this vastly greater power of memory, reflection
and inhibition man is much freer than any other animal. Animals
which learn little from experience have little freedom and
the more they learn the freer they become....</q> Conklin.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
It may be added here that the <q>spiral theory</q> explains how
our reactions can be accelerated and elaborated by ourselves,
and how truly we are the masters of our destinies.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>Because we can find no place in our philosophy and logic
for self determination shall we cease to be scientists and close
our eyes to the evidence? The first duty of science is to appeal
to fact and to settle later with logic and philosophy....</q>
Conklin.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
There will be no difficulty in the settlement of facts with
the new philosophy of <q>Human Engineering.</q>
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q>The analysis of instinct from a purely physiological point of
view ultimately furnishes the data for a scientific ethics.
Human happiness is based upon the possibility of a natural and
harmonious satisfaction of the instincts.... It is rather
<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>
remarkable that we should still be under the influence of an
ethics which considers the human instincts in themselves low
and their gratification vicious. That such an ethics must have
had a comforting effect upon the orientals, whose instincts were
inhibited or warped through the combined effects of an enervating
climate, despotism and miserable economic conditions is
intelligible, and it is perhaps due to a continuation of the unsatisfactory
economic conditions that this ethics still prevails to
some extent.... Lawyers, criminologists and philosophers
frequently imagine that only want makes man work. This is
an erroneous view. We are instinctively forced to be active in
the same way as ants or bees. The instinct of workmanship
would be the greatest source of happiness if it were not for the
fact that our present social and economic organization allows
only a few to satisfy this instinct. Robert Mayer has pointed
out that any successful display or setting free of energy is a
source of pleasure to us. This is the reason why the satisfaction
of the instinct of workmanship is of such importance in the
economy of life, for the play and learning of the child, as well as
for the scientists or commercial work of the man.... We can
vary at will the instincts of animals. A number of marine
animals ... go away from the light, can be forced to go to
light in two ways, first by lowering the temperature and second
by increasing the concentration of the sea water, whereby the
cells of the animals lose water. This instinct can be again
reversed by raising the temperature or by lowering the concentration
of the sea water. I have found repeatedly that by the
same conditions by which phenomena of growth and organization
can be controlled the instincts are controlled also. This
indicates that there is a common basis for both classes of life
phenomena. This common base is the physical and chemical
character of the mixture of substances which we call protoplasm....
<emph>The greatest happiness in life</emph> can be obtained only if <emph>all
instincts</emph>, that of workmanship included, can be maintained at a
certain <emph>optimal intensity</emph>. But while it is certain that the individual
can ruin or diminish the value of its life by a onesided
development of its instincts, e.g., dissipation, it is at the same
time true that the <emph>economic and social conditions can ruin or
diminish the value of life for a great number of individuals</emph>. It
is no doubt true that in our present social and economic conditions
more than ninety per cent of human beings lead an existence
whose value is far below what it should be. They are
compelled by want to sacrifice a number of instincts especially
the most valuable among them, that of workmanship, in order
<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>
to save the lowest and most imperative, that of eating. If
those who amass immense fortunes could possibly intensify their
lives with their abundance, it might perhaps be rational to let
many suffer in order to have a few cases of true happiness. But
for an increase of happiness only that amount of money is of
service which can be used for the harmonious development and
satisfaction of inherited instincts. For this, comparatively little is
necessary. The rest is of no more use to a man than the surplus
of oxygen in the atmosphere. As a matter of fact, the only true
satisfaction a multimillionaire can possibly get from increasing
his fortunes, is the satisfaction of the instinct of workmanship
or the pleasure that is connected with a successful display of
energy. The scientist gets this satisfaction without diminishing
the value of life of his fellow being, and the same should be
true for the business man.... Although we recognize no metaphysical
free-will, we do not deny personal responsibility. We
can fill the memory of the young generation with such associations
as will prevent wrong doing or dissipation.... Cruelty
in the penal code and the tendency to exaggerate punishment
are sure signs of a low civilization and of an imperfect educational
system.... It seems to me that we can no more expect
to unravel the mechanism of associative memory by histological
or morphological methods than we can expect to
unravel the dynamics of electrical phenomena by microscopic
study of cross-sections through a telegraph wire or by counting
and locating the telephone connections in a big city. If we are
anxious to develop a dynamic of the various life-phenomena,
we must remember that the colloidal substances are the machines
which produce the life phenomena, but the physics of these
substances is still a science of the future.... Physiology gives
us no answer to the latter question. The idea of specific energy
has always been regarded as the terminus for the investigation
of the sense organs. Mach expressed the opinion that chemical
conditions lie at the foundation of sensation in general....</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Comparative Physiology of the Brain</hi>, by Jacques Loeb.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Here it may be added that the <q>Instinct of Workmanship</q>
in the animal class, becomes in the time-binding class of life
the instinct of <emph>creation</emph>, and is nothing else than the expression
of the natural impulse of the <q>Time-binding</q> energy. In
the present social and economic system very few have a possibility
to satisfy this instinct; scientific management is or
<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>
may be satisfying the animal instinct of workmanship, but
it is not satisfactory to the instinct of creation. <q>Time-binding</q>
in its last analysis is creation and only such a social
and economic system as will satisfy this want&mdash;this natural
impulse&mdash;will satisfy Humans&mdash;the <q>Time-binders</q>&mdash;and
will bring about their fullest growth in work and happiness.
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend="sc">Laws Of Growth</hi></q> (from <hi rend='italic'>Unified Mathematics</hi>, by
Louis C. Karpinski, Ph.D.). <q rend="pre"><hi rend='italic'>Compound interest
function</hi>.&mdash;The
function <hi rend='italic'>S</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>P</hi>(1 +
<hi rend='italic'>i</hi>)<hi rend="vertical-align: super"><hi rend='italic'>n</hi></hi>
is of fundamental importance
in other fields than in finance. Thus the growth of timber
of a large forest tract may be expressed as a function of this
kind, the assumption being that in a large tract the rate of
growth may be taken as uniform from year to year. In
the case of bacteria growing under ideal conditions in a
culture, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> with unlimited food supplied, the increase in the
number of bacteria per second is proportional to the number
of bacteria present at the beginning of that second. Any
function in which the rate of change or rate of growth at
any instant <hi rend='italic'>t</hi> is directly proportional to the value of the
function at the instant <hi rend='italic'>t</hi> obeys what has been termed the <q>law
of organic growth,</q> and may be expressed by the equation,</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>y = ce<hi rend="vertical-align: super">kt</hi></hi>,
</p>

<p>
wherein <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>k</hi>
are constants determined by the physical
facts involved, and <hi rend='italic'>e</hi> is a constant of
nature analogous to π.
The constant <hi rend='italic'>k</hi> is the proportionality constant and is negative
when the quantity in question decreases; <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> is commonly positive;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>e</hi> = 2.178....
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">The values of the function of <hi rend='italic'>x,
ce<hi rend="vertical-align: super">kx</hi>, increase according to
the terms of a geometrical progression as the variable x increases
in arithmetical progression</hi>....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">The most immediate application of a function in which the
<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>
growth is proportional to the function itself is to the air. The
decrease in the pressure of the air at the distance <hi rend='italic'>h</hi> above
the earth's surface is proportional to <hi rend='italic'>h</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">The expression <hi rend='italic'>P = 760
e<hi rend="vertical-align: super">-h/7990</hi></hi> gives the numerical value
of the pressure in millimeters of mercury for <hi rend='italic'>h</hi> measured in
meters. The negative exponent indicates that the pressure
decreases as <hi rend='italic'>h</hi> increases. In inches as units of length of the
mercury column, <hi rend='italic'>h</hi> in feet,</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>P = 29.92e<hi rend="vertical-align: super">-h/26200</hi></hi>
</p>

<p>
This is known as Halley's law.
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">The growth of bean plants within limited intervals and the
growth of children, again between quite restricted limits,
follow approximately the law of organic growth. Radium in
decomposing follows the same law; the rate of decrease at
any instant being proportional to the quantity. In the case
of vibrating bodies, like a pendulum, the rate of decrease of
the amplitude follows this law; similarly in the case of a noise
dying down and in certain electrical phenomena, the rate of
decrease is proportional at any instant to the value of the
function at the instant....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre"><hi rend='italic'>The Curve of Healing of a Wound.</hi>&mdash;Closely
allied to the
formulas expressing the law of organic growth, <hi rend='italic'>y =
e<hi rend="vertical-align: super">kt</hi></hi>, and
the law of <q>organic decay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>y =
e<hi rend="vertical-align: super">-kt</hi></hi>, is a recently discovered
law which connects algebraically by an equation and graphically
by a curve, the surface-area of a wound, with time expressed
in days, measured from the time when the wound
is aseptic or sterile. When this aseptic condition is reached,
by washing and flushing continually with antiseptic solutions,
two observations at an interval commonly of four days give
the <q>index of the individual,</q> and this index, and the two
measurements of area of the wound-surface, enable the
physician-scientist to determine the normal progress of the
wound-surface, the expected decrease in area, for this wound-surface
<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>
of this individual. The area of the wound is traced
carefully on transparent paper, and then computed by using
a mathematical machine, called a planimeter, which measures
areas.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">The areas of the wound are plotted as ordinates with the
respective times of observation measured in days as abscissas.
After each observation and computation of area the point so
obtained is plotted to the same axes as the graph which gives
the ideal or prophetic curve of healing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">When the observed area is found markedly greater than
that determined by the ideal curve, the indication is that there
is still infection in the wound.... A rather surprising and
unexplained situation occurs frequently when the wound-surface
heals more rapidly than the ideal curve would indicate;
in this event secondary ulcers develop which bring the
curve back to normal....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">This application of mathematics to medicine is largely due
to Dr. Alexis Carrel of the Rockefeller Institute of Medical
Research. He noted that the larger the wound-surface, the
more rapidly it healed, and that the rate of healing seemed
to be proportional to the area. This proportionality constant
is not the same for all values of the surface or we would
have an equation of the form,</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>S =
S<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi>e<hi rend="vertical-align: super">-kt</hi></hi>
</p>

<p>
in which <hi rend='italic'>S</hi>, is the area at the time that the wound is rendered
sterile and observations to be plotted really begin....
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">The data given are taken from the Journal of Experimental
Medicine, reprints kindly furnished by Major George
A. Stewart of the Rockefeller Institute. The diagrams are
reproduced from the issue of Feb. 1, 1918, pp. 171 and 172,
article by Dr. T. Tuffier and R. Desmarres, Auxiliary Hospital
75, Paris....</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/248.png" rend="width: 100%">
  <head>Progress of healing of a surface wound of the right leg, patient's
        age 31 years.</head>
   <figDesc>
    A graph, showing the progress of healing of a surface wound of the right
    leg of a 31-year-old patient. It shows that as time passes, the wounded
    area decreases.
  </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q rend="pre"><hi rend="sc">Wave Motion.</hi> General.&mdash;In nature there are two
types of recurrent motion, somewhat closely connected mathematically,
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>
in which repetition of motion occurs at regular intervals.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">One type of this motion, in cycles as we may say, repeats
the motion in one place, and is in a sense stationary. The
tuning fork in motion moves through the same space again
and again; a similar movement is the motion of a vibrating
string. Of this stationary type may be mentioned the heartbeats,
the pulse, the respiration, the tides, and the rotation
of a wheel about its axis.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">The second type of recurrent motion transmits or carries
the vibratory impulse over an extent of space as well as time.
The waves of the sea are of this character. Sound waves,
electrical vibrations or waves, and radiant energy vibrations
are transmitted by a process similar to that by which the
waves of the sea are carried.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">Both of these types of motion are representable mathematically
by equations involving a sequence of trigonometric
functions. To the fundamental and basic function involved,
<hi rend='italic'>y</hi> = sin <hi rend='italic'>x</hi>,
we will direct our attention in the next section and
to simple applications in other sections of this chapter....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">Sound Waves.&mdash;If a tuning fork for note lower C is set
to vibrating, the free bar makes 129 complete, back-and-forth,
vibrations in one second. By attaching a fine point
to the end of the bar and moving under this bar at a uniform
rate, as it vibrates, a smoke-blackened paper, a sinusoidal
curve is traced on the paper. Our curve is traced by a bar
vibrating 50 times in 1 second.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/249.png" rend="width: 100%">
  <head>Tuning fork vibrations recorded on smoked paper.</head>
  <figDesc>
    A graph, showing a wavy line. <q>Tuning fork vibrations recorded on
    smoked paper.</q>
  </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
<q rend="pre">Corresponding to each movement of the vibrating rod there
is a movement of the air. As the bar moves to the right
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>
it compresses the layer of air to its right and that <emph>compression</emph>
is immediately communicated to the layer of air to the
right; as the bar moves back and to the left, the pressure
on the adjacent air is released and a <emph>rarefaction</emph> takes place.
In 1/50 of 1 second you have the air adjacent to the rod <emph>compressed</emph>,
back to normal, and <emph>rarefied</emph>; during this time the
neighboring air is affected and the compression is communicated
a distance which is the <emph>wave length</emph> of this given
sound wave. In 1 second this disturbance is transmitted
1100 feet at 44° Fahrenheit. The wave length for this sound
wave then is 1100/50 = 22 feet.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The wave length is commonly designated by λ.
If <hi rend='italic'>V</hi>
is the velocity, and <hi rend='italic'>t</hi> the time of one vibration,
λ = <hi rend='italic'>Vt</hi>.</q>
</p>

<figure url="images/250.png" rend="width: 100%">
  <head><q>Vibration records produced by the voice: <q>a</q> as in <q>ate</q>;
        <q>ou</q> as in <q>about</q>; <q>r</q> in <q>relay</q>; <q>e</q> in
        <q>be</q>; and <q>a</q> in <q>father</q>. The tuning fork record,
        frequency 50 per second, gives the vibration frequencies.</q></head>
  <figDesc>
    A graph, showing five wavy lines, labeled <q>a</q>, <q>ou</q>, <q>r</q>,
    <q>E</q>, and <q>a</q>. <q>Vibration records produced by the voice: <q>a</q>
    as in <q>ate</q>; <q>ou</q> as in <q>about</q>; <q>r</q> in <q>relay</q>;
    <q>e</q> in <q>be</q>; and <q>a</q> in <q>father</q>. The tuning fork record,
    frequency 50 per second, gives the vibration frequencies.</q>
  </figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
This last drawing may help to visualize the fact in what
manner wrong expressions and untrue teachings hamper the
true progress of humanity. Every word has its energy and
produces some physico-chemical effects in the time-binding
apparatus in accord with the idea which we associate with
the sound of the word. If we teach ideas which are untrue,
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>
then the physico-chemical effects produced are not proper&mdash;in
other words the human mind does <hi rend="sc">not work properly</hi>,
that is, it does not work <emph>naturally</emph> or <emph>normally</emph> or true to the
human dimension. There is every reason why the standards
in our civilization are so low, because we have <q>poisoned,</q>
in a literal sense of the word, our minds with the physico-chemical
effects of wrong ideas. This correct <hi rend="sc">natural
approach</hi> to the <q>Time-binding</q> energies will make it obvious
how unmeasured is the importance of the manner in
which we handle this subtle mechanism, as the poisoning with
wrong ideas or with careless or incorrect words does not in
any way differ in consequences from poisoning with any other
stupor-producing or wrongly stimulating poison.
</p>

<p>Monographs on Experimental Biology and Physiology</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Loeb</hi>, J.: <q>Comparative Physiology of the Brain and Comparative
Psychology.</q> New York, 1900.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Loeb</hi>, J.: <q>Studies in General Physiology.</q> Chicago, 1905.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Loeb</hi>, J.: <q>The Dynamics of Living Matter.</q> New York,
1906.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Loeb</hi>, J.: <q>The Mechanistic Conception of Life.</q> Chicago,
1912.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
I. The Mechanistic Conception of Life.
II. The Significance of Tropisms for Psychology.
III. Some Fundamental Facts and Conceptions concerning
the Comparative Physiology of the Central
Nervous System.
IV. Pattern Adaptation of Fishes and the Mechanism of
Vision.
V. On Some Facts and Principles of Physiological
Morphology.
VI. On the Nature of the Process of Fertilization.
VII. On the Nature of Formative Stipulation (Artificial
Parthenogenesis).
VIII. The Prevention of the Death of the Egg through the
Act of Fertilization.
<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>
IX. The Rôle of Salts in the Preservation of Life.
X. Experimental Study of the Influence of Environment on Animals.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Loeb, J</hi>.: The Organism as a Whole. G. P. Putnam's Sons. New York, 1916.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
I. Introductory Remarks.
II. The Specific Difference between Living and Dead Matter and the
Question of the Origin of Life.
III. The Chemical Basis of Genus and Species:
1. The Incompatibility of Species not Closely Related.
2. The Chemical basis of Genus and Species and of Species Specificity.
IV. Specificity in Fertilization.
V. Artificial Parthenogenesis.
VI. Determinism in the Formation of an Organism from an Egg.
VII. Regeneration.
VIII. Determination of Sex, Secondary Sexual Characters and Sexual Instincts:
1. The Cytological Basis of Sex Determination.
2. The Physiological Basis of Sex Determination.
IX. Mendelian Heredity and its Mechanism.
X. Animal Instincts and Tropisms.
XI. The Influence of Environment.
XII. Adaptation to Environment.
XIII. Evolution.
XIV. Death and Dissolution of the Organism.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Loeb, J</hi>.: <q>Forced Movements, Tropisms, and Animal Conduct.</q>
J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1918.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
I. Introduction.
II. The Symmetry Relations of the Animal Body as the Starting Point
for the Theory of Animal Conduct.
III. Forced Movements.
IV. Galvanotropism.
V. Heliotropism. The Influence of One Source of Light.
<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>
1. General Facts.
2. Direct Proof of the Muscle Tension Theory of
Heliotropism in Motile Animals.
3. Heliotropism of Unicellular Organisms.
4. Heliotropism of Sessile Animals.
VI. An Artificial Heliotropic Machine.
VII. Asymmetrical Animals.
VIII. Two Sources of Light of Different Intensity.
IX. The Validity of the Bunsen-Roscoe Law for the Heliotropic
Reactions of Animals and Plants.
X. The Effect of Rapid Changes in Intensity of Light.
XI. The Relative Heliotropic Efficiency of Light of Different
Wave Lengths.
XII. Change in the Sense of Heliotropism.
XIII. Geotropism.
XIV. Forced Movements Caused by Moving Retina
Images: Rheotropism: Anemotropism.
XV. Stereotropism.
XVI. Chemotropism.
XVII. Thermotropism.
XVIII. Instincts.
XIX. Memory Images and Tropisms.
</p>

<p>
A list of <emph>554 books on this subject</emph>, in which any
reader interested will find a vast storehouse of exact
knowledge in this line. Author.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Conklin, Edwin Grant:</hi> <q>Heredity and Environment in the
Development of Men.</q> Princeton University Press,
1915.
</p>

<p>
Selection from contents:
I. Facts and Factors of Development.
Introduction.
A. Phenomena of Development.
B. Factors of Development.
II. Cellular Basis of Heredity and Development.
A. Introductory.
B. The Germ Cells.
C. The Mechanism of Heredity.
D. The Mechanism of Development.
III. Phenomena of Inheritance.
A. Observations on Inheritance.
B. Statistical Study of Inheritance.
C. Experimental Study of Inheritance.
<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>
IV. Influence of Environment.
A. Relative Importance of Heredity and Environment.
B. Experimental Modifications of Development.
C. Functional Activity as a Factor of Development.
D. Inheritance or Non-inheritance of Acquired
Characters.
E. Applications to Human Development: Euthenics.
V. Control of Heredity: Eugenics.
A. Domesticated Animals and Cultivated Plants.
B. Control of Human Heredity.
VI. Genetics and Ethics.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
Glossary of books on this subject; for those who
desire to be more fully acquainted with the subjects
of heredity and development. Author.
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Morgan, T. H.</hi>, <q>Physical Basis of Heredity.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">East, E. M.</hi>, and <hi rend="sc">Jones, D. F.</hi>,
<q>Inbreeding and Outbreeding,</q>
etc.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Parker, G. H.</hi>, <q>The Elementary Nervous System.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Harvey, E. N.</hi>, <q>The Nature of Animal Light.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="255"/><anchor id="Pg255"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Appendix III. Engineering And Time-Binding"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Appendix III. Engineering And Time-Binding"/>
<anchor id="Appendix_III"/>
<head>Appendix III. Engineering And Time-Binding</head>

<p>
The Arts of Engineering, by their very nature, are derived
from the work of dead men and destined to serve not
only the present but the future. They are freer than any
other human activity from the errors of intermixing dimensions
and from the fallacy of belief in individualistic accomplishment
and pride. The simple steel structure of a bridge,
familiar to us in every day life, is a clear reminder to us
all of the arts of Hephæstus and the bound-up knowledge
of countless generations of smiths and mechanics, metallurgists
and chemists, mathematicians and builders, teachers and engineers
who toiled for many thousands of years to make possible
the riveted steel beams which are the elements of modern
structure. These structures do not collapse unless the
natural laws for their construction are transgressed; which
seldom happens&mdash;for no one is entrusted with the work unless
he has bound up in his knowledge the accumulated experience
of the past; yet the transgressors of these natural laws are
punished with all the severity of the common law. When a
bridge is opened and tested, the written laws in some
countries and the unwritten in others, and the pride and the
sense of responsibility of the designer and builder of the
bridge demand that he, the creator of the bridge, be the
first to enter it and the last to leave it; and should the bridge
collapse, he has to take the immediate consequences of his
neglect of the time-binding laws.
</p>

<p>
Rarely are the affairs of engineering done with the entirely
selfish motive of merely acquiring immediate selfish gain,
<pb n="256"/><anchor id="Pg256"/>
for even when this could be traced&mdash;this unworthy thought
disappears in the halo of the glory of the accomplishment.
Mr. Eiffel did not erect his tower to haunt Paris with the
sight of a steel skeleton towering over the city of daring
thoughts. His tower stands to-day as a mechanical proof of
mathematical formulas proving the possibility of erecting tall,
self-supporting structures and thereby serving future humanity.
The Time-binding capacity of humans creates and formulates
new values for the service of mankind. Again, no
student of the Arts of Engineering could ever forget himself
to the point of claiming his accomplishments, no matter how
marvelous, all to himself. No wondrous discovery of modern
electricity, not even the talking from one hemisphere to
another, is rightly the accomplishment of any one man, for
the origin of the discovery can be traced at least as far back
as the days of that barefooted shepherd boy Magnus, who first
observed the phenomena of magnetism.
</p>

<p>
In an attempt to trace and evaluate the time-binding faculties
manifested in the Arts of Engineering, one is at once
astonished, and bewildered, at the confusion and contradictions
unrealized in the mass of evidence, and how pathetic
and deplorable is the sight of hundreds of thousands of workers
in the field of engineering toil and creation who unconsciously
submit to the degradation, in silent consent, of seeing
their marvelous collective achievements chained to space-binding
aims.
</p>

<p>
Upon the completion of this book I was astonished that
there are such a small number of engineers who have the
intuitive feeling of the greatness of the assets at their command
and of the gravity of their liabilities concerning affairs
of humanity. I was eager to have my book read and analysed
by a few leading engineers. The late H. L. Gantt being no
more with us, I then turned to Walter N. Polakov, Doctor
of Engineering; Industrial Counselor; Chairman of Committee
on Service and Information, Fuels Section, A.S.M.E.,
<pb n="257"/><anchor id="Pg257"/>
and Robert B. Wolf, Vice-President of A.S.M.E. In them
I found, to the full, a very sympathetic understanding and
my esteem grew as I became more intimately acquainted with
the character of their work and their accomplishments. Both
have done a most remarkable work in their respective lines.
It will not be an exaggeration to say that their work, together
with the work of the late H. L. Gantt and Charles P.
Steinmetz, may be considered as the first&mdash;to my knowledge&mdash;corner-stones
of the science and art of Human Engineering,
and form the first few volumes and writings for the New
Library of the Manhood of Humanity. These books and
pamphlets are based on facts analysed scientifically, marking
the parting of the way of engineering thought from the past
subjection to speculative fetishes.
</p>

<p>
Of all the pure and applied sciences, engineering alone has
the distinction of being the first to have the <emph>correct</emph> insight
into the human problem. The task of engineers was to convert
knowledge&mdash;brain work&mdash;<q>bound-up time</q>&mdash;into daily
bread by means of conserving time and effort. This concept
is naught else but the working out of the imperfect formulation
of the time-binding principle. It was inevitable, therefore,
that some engineers had already beaten the path in the
right direction. How straight and how far this sense of
dimensionality has led some of them in their practical work
may be seen from the work of Walter N. Polakov, in his
<hi rend='italic'>Mastering Power Production</hi>, Engineering Magazine, N. Y.,
1921.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q rend="pre">It was not my intention to compile a text book on power
engineering; it was rather my care to avoid the treatment of
any technical subject which could be found elsewhere in engineering
literature; but I could not avoid trespassing in the
adjoining fields of psychology and economics, for without
familiarity with these sciences the mastery of power production
is a futile attempt.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">I do not hold that the principles upon which the method is
laid out are subject to choice or opinions, for they are based on
<pb n="258"/><anchor id="Pg258"/>
facts. Yet work of this character cannot be complete, or
examples may be illy chosen, for it deals with living and constantly
reshaping relations and applies to things in process of
development.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>If this work and its underlying idea will facilitate the solving
of some of the problems now in the course of rapid evolution in
our industrial relations, I shall feel that my own and my readers'
time have not been altogether lost.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Indeed the readers' time will not be lost. This book gives
an engineering, scientific&mdash;in the meantime practical&mdash;analysis
of all human problems. It is a deep and practical treatise
on all great questions concerning modern industrialism and
so-called economic problems and is a foundation for a new
scientific industrial philosophy. Another very clear outline
of the <hi rend='italic'>Principles of Industrial Philosophy</hi> was given by Mr.
Polakov in his paper presented at the annual meeting of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, December 7-10,
1920. Anyone who has anything to do with industrial or
economic problems cannot afford to overlook the important
and fundamental work in this book.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious that a scientific knowledge of facts, is of the
greatest importance for anyone who cares to approach any
problem in a serious way. Statistics which are up-to-date are
therefore of primary importance. I had the privilege of reading
the manuscript of <hi rend='italic'>Quo Vadis America</hi>, the forthcoming
book of Mr. Polakov, where a most valuable statistical picture
of facts in modern America is given and the astonishing conclusions
which are to be drawn therefrom. I can only regret
that in Europe we have not such a knowledge written down
concerning European conditions. If more such books had
been written and <emph>read</emph> by the public, many crises and catastrophes
would have been avoided.
</p>

<p>
The outstanding contribution of Mr. Robert B. Wolf to
engineering was made in his study of physiology, biology,
psychology and philosophy as applied to engineering.
</p>

<pb n="259"/><anchor id="Pg259"/>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q rend="pre">If anyone wishes to inquire into the forces which have led
up to the individual development of mankind, he will find himself
at once plunged into the realm of psychology and mental
philosophy. I can heartily recommend such a course as immensely
profitable and of practical value.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">The five important facts, however, that have to do with the
subject in hand are:</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre"><hi rend='italic'>1st.</hi> That the human body is
such a wonderful organization
because it is the product of the forces of creation, acting through
millions of years of evolution.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre"><hi rend='italic'>2nd.</hi> That its capacity for
progress depends upon the maintenance
of the unity resulting from this creative evolution and
upon a conscious recognition of this unity.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre"><hi rend='italic'>3d.</hi> That this unity
would not have been possible without the
development of the nervous system.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre"><hi rend='italic'>4th.</hi> That the conscious
intelligent progress made by mankind
could not have reached its present level until in the process
of evolution a mechanism had been built up in the nervous system
itself capable of recording the various impressions which the
senses are constantly receiving.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre"><hi rend='italic'>5th.</hi> That the recording of
past events, with the power of
consciously recalling them for the solution of problems immediately
confronting it, is absolutely essential to its development.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Now, what I want to point out is that inasmuch as man's
progress depends upon the perfect co-ordination of his forces to
produce unity of action, we have no right to expect an industrial
organization to make progress which it must do as a unit
without the establishment of a conscious co-ordinating mechanism
similar to the nervous system in the human body.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Individuality
in Industry.</hi> By Robert B. Wolf.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Doctor Charles P. Steinmetz has given in his <hi rend='italic'>America and
the New Epoch</hi> a most correct engineering picture of the
political situation in the world, with a fine characterization
of the psychological peculiarities of the different races.
Although this book was written in 1916, that is, before the
end of the World War, it will be of permanent value;
because of its deep psychological analysis of the peoples and
their institutions which ultimately shape the development of
any nation and which do not change with victory or defeat.
</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>
<q rend="pre">My tribute to the memory of Gantt will be, not only the
homage of a friend and admirer, but the proof that his philosophy
<pb n="260"/><anchor id="Pg260"/>
is scientifically true. A rigorous proof is necessary,
because the word <q>service</q> belongs to that category of words,
the meaning of which can be completely reversed by the verb,
be it <q>give</q> or <q>take.</q> Gantt took <q>rendering service</q> as an
axiom; my observation, shared with many others, is that our
civilization had quite another axiom, <q>we preach give, we
practice take.</q> The problem which interested me, was how to
find a way out of this contradiction that would be irrefutable.
If one of them is true and natural law for humans, then the
other is not; if our words are true, then our deeds are not true,
or if our deeds are true then the words are camouflage. I found
the solution, by applying mathematically rigorous thinking.
Mathematics, with its exact concept of dimensions, gave me the
method. The method we use in studying phenomena is analysis,
or speaking mathematically, differentiation. I soon found, that
the methods of differentiation are mostly correct, but our synthesis,
or process of integration made by the use of metaphysics
was faulty. The differentiation correctly lowered the dimensions,
but our faulty integration did not restore the original
dimensions. The investigation had to be made from the beginning,
by defining the phenomena of life, in a specific way, which
would not permit of any blunders in dimensions.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">I defined the classes of life by emphasizing their incontestable,
dimensional characteristics: plants are <q>Chemistry-binding,</q>
animals are <q>Space-binding,</q> Humans are <q>Time-binding</q>
classes of life.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">These definitions have the peculiarity that they make it
obvious, that: 1. The classes of life have different dimensions,
and that the intermixing of dimensions, as in mathematics it
makes a correct solution impossible, so in life, the results of such
elementary mistakes, produce tragic consequences.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">2. The old formula on which our civilization is built,
<hi rend="sc">human</hi>
equal <hi rend="sc">animal</hi> plus or multiplied by
<hi rend="sc">spark of divinity</hi>
is basically and elementarily wrong, and is mathematical nonsense,
which is identical to such an absurdity as <hi rend='italic'>x</hi> square inches
equal <hi rend='italic'>y</hi> linear inches plus or multiplied by
<hi rend='italic'>z</hi> cubic inches.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">3. A basically wrong formula on which our civilization
rests, is the cause of all the periodical collapses, wars and
revolutions.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">4. The old system was built on animal <q>space-binding</q>
standards, and human <q>time-binding</q> impulses were, all the
time, in rebellion.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">5. As the theory of gravitation and the calculus made engineers
and mathematicians masters of inanimate nature, so these
<pb n="261"/><anchor id="Pg261"/>
tangible and incontestable definitions give them a positive base
which will enable them to approach and solve human living
problems, by establishing the mathematical fact that man is
man, not an animal.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">6. All of those who are blinded by traditions and refuse to
investigate, or to know these mathematical truths, are a danger
to humanity in directly helping to obscure issues, and in helping
to maintain the faulty structure which, as in the past, is bound
to collapse again and again in the future.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">7. The duty of mathematically thinking people is to throw
such light on this problem as will stop the stupid, or willfully
destructive, and show whether they are working for, or against,
mankind.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">8. For the <q>time-binding</q> class of life, it is obvious then
that in this dimension, <q>time-binding</q> is the natural law, and,
if understood and analysed, it is the highest human aim.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">9. Such <q>natural laws</q> as <q>survival of the fittest</q> for animals,
which is the <q>survival of the fittest in space,</q> result in
fight, or the survival of the strongest; whereas such a law to be a
<hi rend="sc">natural law for humans</hi>, must be in the human
dimension which obviously would be the <q>Survival of the fittest
in <hi rend="sc">time</hi>,</q> resulting in the survival of the best.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">10. All known facts must be brought to the light, to be
summed up, and correlated by mathematicians and engineers
with the strictest attention to dimensionality.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">11. All of our ideas have to be revised; the animal <q>space-binding</q>
standards must be rejected as dangerous and destructive,
must be replaced by <q>time-binding</q> standards, which will
correspond to the natural impulses and <hi rend="sc">natural laws</hi> for
humans.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">12. The minds of mathematicians and engineers are by education
the first to see the far reaching importance of the facts
disclosed by these definitions, and just this realization will bring
about the readjustment of values in life to a human dimension,
wherein pending revolutions and wars could be turned into evolution,
destruction into construction, discord into accord of a
common aim.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend="pre">We are the masters of our own destinies, the responsibility is
ours to correct the mistakes of our ancestors and to establish a
scientific philosophy, scientifically true laws, scientifically true
ethics, and a scientific sociology, which will form one unified
science of man and his function in the universe, a science which
I propose to call <q>Human Engineering.</q> Gantt's methods
would be the first practical application toward this end.</q>
</p>

<pb n="262"/><anchor id="Pg262"/>

<p>
<q>Gantt's concept of rendering service is scientifically true
because it is <q>time-binding,</q> and therefore true for the human
class of life and in human dimension. This is why Gantt's
concepts have counted for so much and will survive <q><hi rend="sc">in time</hi>.</q></q>
Discussion by Alfred Korzybski of Mr. W. N. Polakov's
paper <q>Principles of Industrial Philosophy</q> presented at the
Annual Meeting of The American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
New York, December 7-10, 1920.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
LITERATURE
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Gantt, H. L.:</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q>Work, Wages, and Profits.</q> The Engineering Magazine
Co., 1913. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>Industrial Leadership.</q> Yale University Press. 1916.
</p>

<p>
<q>Organizing for Work.</q> Harcourt, Brace &amp; Howe, 1919. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
Selection from Contents: The Engineer as the Industrial
Leader. Economics and Democracy. Democracy in
Production. Democracy in the Shop. Democracy
in Management. <q>The Religion of Democracy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Polakov, Walter N.</hi>:
</p>

<p>
<q>Mastering Power Production.</q> The Engineering Magazine Co. 1921. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
Selection from Contents: The Descent of the Principle of
Production for Use. The Power Industry as an Economic
Factor. Mastering Labor Problems. (Conditions)
Autonomous Co-operation. Aims of Labor. Right to be
Lazy and the Right to a Job. Qualification of Men. The
Working Day. Fatigue. <hi rend="sc">universal labor</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Corresponding
exactly to Time-binding&mdash;Author</hi>). The Position
of an Engineer. Mastering Labor Problems. Compensation.
The Social Aspect. The Economic Aspect.
The Basis of Wages. Incentive Payments. Profit Sharing.
Premium Places. Rewarding Individual Efforts.
Two-rate wages. Energy as a Commodity.
</p>

<p>
<q>Principles of Industrial Philosophy.</q> Presented at the
Annual Meeting of the A. S. of M. E., December, 1920.
</p>

<p>
<q>Equipment and Machinery.</q> Y. M. C. A. Association Press. 1921. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>Organization and Management.</q> Y. M. C. A. Association Press. 1921. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>Quo Vadis America?</q> In preparation.
</p>

<pb n="263"/><anchor id="Pg263"/>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Steinmetz, Charles P.</hi>:
</p>

<p>
<q>America and the New Epoch.</q> Harper &amp; Brothers. 1916. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
Selection from Contents: The Individualistic Era: From
Competition to Co-operation. England in the Individualistic
Era. Germany in the Individualistic Era. The
Other European Nations in the Individualistic Era.
America in the Individualistic Era. Evolution: Industrial
Government.
</p>

<p>
<q>Incentive and Initiative.</q> Y. M. C. A. Association Press. 1921. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Wolf, Robert B.:</hi> Pamphlets.
</p>

<p>
<q>Individuality in Industry.</q> Bulletin of the Society to
promote the Science of Management. Vol. I. No. 4.
August, 1915.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Creative Workman.</q> Technical Association of the
Pulp and Paper Industry. 1918. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>Non-Financial Incentives.</q> Presented at the Annual
Meeting of the A. S. of M. E. December, 1918. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>Modern Industry and the Individual.</q> A. W. Shaw &amp; Co.
1919. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>Securing the Initiative of the Workman.</q> American Economic
Association. 1919. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<q>Creative Spirit in Industry.</q> Y. M. C. A. Association
Press. 1921. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
MISCELLANEOUS LIST OF BOOKS
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Von Bernhardi</hi>, General F.: <q>Germany and the Next War.</q>
E. Arnold, London. 1912.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Brandeis, Louis</hi>: <q>Other People's Money and How the Bankers
Use it.</q> F. A. Stokes, N. Y. 1914.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Thomas Farrow</hi> and <hi rend="sc">Walter Crotch</hi>:
<q>The Coming Trade
War.</q> Chapman &amp; Hall, London. 1916.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Hueffer, Ford Maddox</hi>: <q>When Blood is Their Argument.</q>
Hodder &amp; Stoughton. 1915. N. Y.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Hauser, Henry</hi>: <q>Germany's Commercial Grip on the World,
Her Business Methods Explained.</q> E. Nash Co., London.
1917.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Laughlin, J. L.</hi>: <q>Credit of the Nations.</q> Scribner's Sons,
N. Y. 1918.
</p>

<pb n="264"/><anchor id="Pg264"/>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Maetzu, Ramiro de</hi>: <q>Authority, Liberty and Function in the
Light of War.</q> Geo. Allen and Unwin.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Delaisi, Francis</hi>: French Opinion, <q>The Inevitable War.</q>
Small, Maynard &amp; Co., Boston. 1915.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">Neilson, Francis</hi>: English Opinion, <q>How Diplomats Make
War.</q> B. W. Huebsch. 1916.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="sc">By a German</hi> (German Opinion). <q>J'Accuse!</q> Hodder &amp;
Stoughton, London. 1915.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
